Journal Pre-proof Targeting Hypertriglyceridemia to Mitigate Cardiovascular Risk: A Review State-of-the-Art Review Targeting Hypertriglyceridemia to Mitigate Cardiovascular Risk: A Review Brief title: Hypertriglyceridemia and Cardiovascular Risk Word count (body only): 4442 (5000 maximum)
Peter Toth, Prediman Shah, Norman Lepor
A causal relationship between elevated triglycerides and cardiovascular disease is controversial, as trials of triglyceride-lowering treatments have not shown significant impact on cardiovascular outcomes. However, hypertriglyceridemia is associated with atherogenesis and risk for acute cardiovascular events that persist despite optimal statin treatment. Although most trials of triglyceride-lowering treatments have been negative, in trials of niacin and fibrates, subgroup analyses in patients with higher baseline triglycerides and lower HDL-C levels suggest reduced incidence of cardiovascular endpoints. The REDUCE-IT trial demonstrated that addition of purified prescription eicosapentaenoic acid (icosapent ethyl) 4 g/day in high-risk patients with triglyceride levels 135-499 mg/dL and optimized statin treatment significantly reduced cardiovascular events versus placebo (hazard ratio 0.75; 95% confidence interval 0.68-0.83; P<0.001). Benefit was seen regardless of baseline and on-treatment triglyceride levels, suggesting that other effects of eicosapentaenoic acid besides triglyceride reduction may have played a role. Keywords: Triglycerides, REDUCE-IT, icosapent ethyl, eicosapentaenoic acid J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Highlights: • Hypertriglyceridemia is associated with atherogenesis & cardiovascular event risk • Most triglyceride treatment cardiovascular outcomes trials have been negative • However, icosapent ethyl significantly reduced cardiovascular events in REDUCE-IT • Effects of icosapent ethyl beyond triglyceride reduction may play a role J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f
The American Heart Association has long recognized that elevated triglyceride (TG) levels are a marker of cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk. 1 TG and TG-rich lipoproteins (TRLs) are among the atherogenic lipids and lipoproteins believed to be both causal and prognostic factors for atherosclerotic CV disease (ASCVD). 2, 3 Although there is pathophysiologic evidence for a role of TG in ASCVD, as well as observational and clinical trial data supporting the association between elevated TG levels and CV event risk, 4, 5 until recently primary endpoints of clinical trials of TG-lowering agents including fibric acid derivatives, niacin, and omega-3 fish oils have failed to show CV event risk reduction. [6] [7] [8] [9] [10] [11] [12] [13] The objective of this review is to examine the biochemical and clinical evidence for the role of elevated TG levels in ASCVD and to place the results of CV outcomes trials of TG-lowering agents, including the recent Reduction of Cardiovascular Events with Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial (REDUCE-IT), 14 into proper context. Although hypertriglyceridemia most commonly occurs secondary to conditions such as metabolic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, and central obesity, it can also be caused by various medications as well as primary genetic causes; these are summarized in Table 1 . 15 In some individuals, such as those with primary hypertriglyceridemia, excess alcohol consumption, or pregnancy, TG levels can rise to >1000 mg/dL, a significant risk factor for acute pancreatitis requiring immediate treatment. [15] [16] [17] J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Hypertriglyceridemia results from increased production of TRLs (ie, chylomicrons and verylow-density lipoproteins), decreased catabolism of TRLs, or a combination of the two, leading to an excess of TRLs and changes in the composition of key lipoprotein particles, including lowand high-density lipoproteins (LDL and HDL). 1 In the setting of hypertriglyceridemia, cholesterol ester transfer protein transfers TGs out of TRLs in exchange for cholesterol esters from HDL and LDL particles. As the HDL and LDL particles become progressively more enriched with TGs, they become better substrates for lipolysis by hepatic lipase, resulting in HDL catabolism and increased formation of smaller, denser LDL particles. This produces "atherogenic dyslipidemia," with high TRLs, increased numbers of small, dense LDL, and low serum levels of HDL. In people with hypertriglyceridemia, HDL may be dysfunctional and less likely to participate in reverse cholesterol transport, while small, dense LDL particles may be more susceptible to oxidative modification and reduced clearance. Hypertriglyceridemia is also associated with increased remnant lipoprotein particles (RLPs, which include very-low-density lipoproteins and intermediate-density lipoproteins) due to inadequate lipoprotein lipase (LPL) activity, such that RLPs are not lipolyzed and converted to LDL particles. RLPs are proatherogenic, as they contain apolipoprotein (apo) B, apo CIII, TGs, and cholesteryl esters. Similar to LDL particles, TRLs are trapped by glycosaminoglycans in the intima of blood vessels, where they are scavenged by macrophages to form foam cells and promulgate inflammation. 18 There is also evidence that free fatty acids released from hydrolyzed TGs and TRLs in the subendothelial space are pro-inflammatory and contribute to atherogenesis. 19, 20 Remnants upregulate the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (eg, tumor necrosis factor-á, interleukin-6, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f monocyte chemoattractant protein-1) and are directly cytotoxic to endothelium. [21] [22] [23] Ultimately, inflammation in the subendothelial space triggers formation of a pro-oxidative, pro-atherogenic milieu. The possible causal role of elevated TG levels in ASCVD development and progression is supported by genetic, genome-wide analysis, and Mendelian randomization studies 3 that confirm elevated TG levels may play a causal role in atherogenesis. In a multivariable Mendelian randomization study of 20,000 individuals with myocardial infarction (MI), a one standard deviation increase in TG levels correlated with a 54% increase in risk for coronary heart disease (CHD). 24 Common polymorphisms associated with higher TG levels and increased ASCVD event risk include loss-of-function mutations in APOA5 and APOC2, and gain-of-function mutations in APOC3, angiopoietin-like proteins-3 and -4, and LPL variants. 25 In contrast, genetic studies have demonstrated that genetically lower TG levels, irrespective of causal polymorphism, correlate with lower risk of ASCVD. [26] [27] [28] [29]  Several studies have shown that elevated TG levels correlate with elevated ASCVD event risk. In an analysis of 1836 consecutive patients who underwent coronary revascularization, risk of CV death over the subsequent 10 years was significantly associated with higher TG levels (P=0.002), even after adjusting for total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol (HDL-C). 30 J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f The Strong Heart Study reported the effects of TGs in a community-based, prospective cohort of 3216 Native Americans and found that elevated (?150 mg/dL) fasting TG levels and low (<40 mg/dL) HDL-C levels were associated with increased risk of incident CHD and ischemic stroke, particularly in individuals with diabetes or LDL cholesterol (LDL-C) levels ?130 mg/dL, independent of other risk factors. 31 34 These results remained statistically significant even after adjusting for HDL-C levels. In an analysis of baseline fasting TG levels from 2307 patients with type 2 diabetes and CVD in the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial, higher TG levels were associated with major adverse CV events. 35 While elevated TG levels are an established marker for increased risk of CVD, the causal relationship is less certain. A large J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f meta-analysis of epidemiologic data found that although higher TG levels are associated with increased CHD risk, the correlation was substantially attenuated after adjusting for established risk factors, especially HDL-C. 36 Data also suggest that lower TG levels are associated with reduced CV event risk. In the Pravastatin or Atorvastatin Evaluation and Infection Therapy-Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction 22 trial (PROVE-IT TIMI 22), patients who received statin treatment following hospitalization for acute coronary syndrome had a lower risk of further CHD events if ontreatment TG levels were <150 mg/dL. 4 For each 10% lowering of on-treatment TG levels, there was a 2.7% reduction in incidence of subsequent CHD events (P=0.003). 4 In addition, Mendelian randomization analyses evaluating participants in the UK Biobank study or in one of 62 cohort, case-controlled, or cross-sectional studies conducted in North America or Europe found that TGlowering LPL variants and LDL-C-lowering LDL-receptor variants were associated with a similar lower risk of CHD per unit difference in apo B. 37 Elevated RLP, which are associated with hypertriglyceridemia, have also been correlated with CV events. An analysis of the Copenhagen City Heart Study found that a 39 mg/dL increase in non-fasting RLPs was associated with a 2.8-fold risk in ischemic heart disease. 38 Similar results were reported in an analysis of the Jackson Heart and Framingham Offspring Cohort studies. 39 Even after adjustment for other CV event risk factors, increased RLP remained a predictor of CHD (HR 1.18; 95% CI 1.00-1.39; P=0.049). J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Taken together, these data indicate that elevated TG and TRL levels and related markers are at least prognostic for ASCVD risk, and are potentially causative. A recent National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES)-based analysis found that >25% of US adults have elevated TG levels, including stain-treated patients; it was estimated that over the next decade, there will be >3.4 million ASCVD events in patients with LDL-C levels <100 mg/dL who have TG levels ?150 mg/dL, with ~1 million of these events occurring in statin users. 40 This high number of events predicted in statin-treated patients highlights the presence of CV event risk even in patients with controlled LDL-C. 2 Although there is evidence that lower TG levels are associated with reduced ASCVD event risk, most CV outcomes trials of TG-lowering treatments, such as niacin and fibrates, have failed to show clinical benefit ( Table 2) . None of these studies sought to randomize patients with hypertriglyceridemia, and neither of the 2 studies evaluating the efficacy of combining niacin with statin treatment demonstrated CV event risk reduction. The Atherothrombosis Intervention in Metabolic Syndrome with Low HDL/High Triglycerides: Impact on Global Health Outcomes (AIM-HIGH) investigators studied the effect of niacin in patients with elevated TG levels and low HDL-C levels who received intensive statin therapy. 41 In the niacin group, median TG levels decreased from 164 mg/dL at baseline to 120 mg/dL after 3 years, while median HDL-C levels increased from 35 mg/dL to 42 mg/dL. Despite improvements in the plasma lipid profile with niacin, there was no difference between treatment groups in the composite primary CV endpoint (HR 1.02; 95% CI 0.87-1.21; P=0.80). However, in a subgroup of patients with TG levels ?200 J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f mg/dL and HDL-C levels <32 mg/dL, CV event risk decreased with niacin versus placebo (HR 0.64; P=0.032). 42 The Heart Protection Study 2-Treatment of HDL to Reduce the Incidence of Vascular Events (HPS2-THRIVE), which investigated niacin in combination with laropiprant when added to simvastatin ± ezetimibe, also failed to show clinical benefit with niacin for major vascular events (rate ratio 0.96; 95% CI 0.90-1.03; P=0.29). 7 An exploratory subgroup analysis of HPS2-THRIVE in patients with low HDL-C levels and TG levels >151 mg/dL found that niacin was not associated with reduction in incidence of major vascular events. Diabetes (ACCORD) Lipid study, in which fenofibrate was added to open-label simvastatin in patients with diabetes, found that although the fenofibrate group experienced a mean reduction in TG levels of 42 mg/dL, there was no corresponding benefit in the primary composite CV endpoint (HR 0.92; 95% CI 0.79-1.08; P=0.32). 8 There was, however, a trend toward better outcomes in fenofibrate-treated patients who had TG levels in the upper tertile (?204 mg/dL) and HDL-C levels in the lowest tertile (?34 mg/dL) (P=0.057). 8 The Fenofibrate Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) trial randomized patients with type 2 diabetes to fenofibrate or placebo 9 ; after 4 months, there was a 29% decrease in TG, 5% increase in HDL-C, and a 12% decrease in LDL-C levels. The primary CV endpoint, first occurrence of non-fatal MI or CHD death, was not significantly different between groups (HR 0.89; 95% CI 0.75-1.05; P=0.16). The overall finding of the FIELD study was likely impacted by the fact that more patients in the placebo arm (17%) were treated with a non-study lipid-lowering drug (mainly statins) at any point during the study than the fenofibrate arm (8%). A significant reduction in J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f total CVD events was observed (HR 0.89; 95% CI 0.80-0.99; P=0.035) and driven by reduction of non-fatal MI and coronary revascularization. In the Bezafibrate Infarction Prevention (BIP) study, 43 patients with a history of MI and/or stable angina were randomized to bezafibrate or placebo. Although there was a 21% reduction in TG and an increase in HDL-C levels sustained for 5 years, there was no significant reduction in risk of the composite CV endpoint after a mean 6.2 years of follow-up (risk reduction 9.4%; P=0.26). A subgroup analysis of the BIP study by TG level found that elevated baseline TG levels were significantly associated with a greater reduction in CV endpoints with bezafibrate, with a 39.5% reduction in the primary endpoint versus a 7.9% reduction in those with TG levels <150 mg/dL (relative risk [RR] 0.57; 95% CI 0.35-0.93). 43 The ongoing Pemafibrate to Reduce Cardiovascular Outcomes by Reducing Triglycerides in Patients with Diabetes (PROMINENT) trial will provide additional information on fibrates in managing patients with TG levels ?200 and <500 mg/dL and low HDL-C levels. 44 There has been interest in omega-3 fatty acids (eicosapentaenoic acid [EPA] and docosahexaenoic acid [DHA]) for prevention of CVD due to a low CVD incidence in populations that consume high amounts of fatty fish. 45 Short-term studies have shown that omega-3 fatty acids (2-4 g/day) can reduce plasma TG levels. 46-50 A number of CV outcomes studies have been conducted in patients receiving omega-3 fatty acids ( Table 3 and  High CV Risk Patients With Hypertriglyceridemia (STRENGTH) trial, 56 a phase 3 study of combination omega-3 carboxylic acids (4 g/day EPA+DHA), was discontinued prior to completion given that the drug was unlikely to demonstrate a clinical benefit among patients with dyslipidemia (TG levels ?180 mg/dL and <500 mg/dL; HDL-C <42 mg/dL in men or <47 mg/dL in women) considered to be at high risk for future CV disease events. [56] [57] [58] Thus, the collective clinical data do not support the efficacy of DHA+EPA combination omega-3 fatty acids for ASCVD event risk reduction. As with most studies of fibrates and niacin, these DHA+EPA studies, with the exception of STRENGTH, did not specifically enroll patients with hypertriglyceridemia. In addition, doses of omega-3 fatty acids were generally low (?1 g/day), and may have been inadequate for CV event risk reduction. However, the discontinued STRENGTH trial did enroll patients with elevated TG levels, and employed a higher dose of 4 g/day EPA+DHA, yet still failed to demonstrate benefit. 56 in high-risk patients with hypertriglyceridemia on statin therapy. 65 The effectiveness of EPAtreatment in REDUCE-IT, coupled with the discontinuation of the STRENGTH trial given that the EPA+DHA carboxylic acid compound used was deemed unlikely to demonstrate a benefit in patients, suggest that these effects may be specific to EPA, rather than a class effect of omega-3 fatty acids. 57, 61 The clinical benefit seen with icosapent ethyl in REDUCE-IT was achieved regardless of baseline or on-treatment TG levels. 14 Similarly, the relatively modest decrease in TG levels in JELIS does not fully explain the observed clinical benefit of EPA treatment. 60 A recent metaanalysis of omega-3 fatty acid studies including REDUCE-IT supported a reduction in the risk of CVD endpoints 66 ; however, a meta-analysis of TG-lowering treatments suggested that the CVD risk reduction associated with TG level lowering alone was relatively modest after exclusion of REDUCE-IT. 67 While elevated TG levels have been identified in some studies as an independent CVD risk factor, 68, 69 there is some evidence to the contrary. For example, another recent metaanalysis found that while an elevated TG level in patients with type 2 diabetes was associated with an increased risk of CVD, this association was lost after adjusting for other blood lipid parameters. 70 In REDUCE-IT, changes in EPA levels, not in lipid biomarker and inflammatory parameters, accounted for most of the study's relative risk reduction for the primary and secondary endpoints. 71 Nonetheless, patients in REDUCE-IT with elevated TG levels and the associated high risk of ASCVD events were shown to benefit from EPA treatment. Taken together, this suggests that pleiotropic effects of EPA beyond TG lowering may contribute to CV event risk reduction. Efficacy of Combination Therapy-Statin and Eicosapentaenoic Acid (RESPECT-EPA) 72  Taking Statin Therapy (EVAPORATE) trial 73 will provide additional insights into the role of EPA in statin-treated patients for reduction of persistent CV event risk and progression of coronary atherosclerosis, respectively. A 9-month interim analysis of EVAPORATE showed that icosapent ethyl at 4 g/day did not reduce progression of low attenuation plaque volume (74% vs 94%; P=0.47) or fibrofatty plaque volume (87% vs 25%; P=0.65) versus placebo, respectively (n=30, IPE; n=37, placebo). 74 However, icosapent ethyl did reduce progression of total plaque versus placebo (15% vs 26%; P<0.001). The study is designed to conclude after 18 months of therapy. 74 Putative pleiotropic effects of EPA beyond TG lowering include reduction of inflammatory markers (eg, high-sensitivity C-reactive protein), and inflammatory cytokines. 46, 47, 75 In addition, EPA has been shown to have beneficial effects on endothelial function, oxidative stress, foam cell formation, plaque formation/progression, cholesterol crystal formation and plaque rupture, J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f platelet aggregation, and thrombus formation (Figure 3) . 75, 76 These collective effects may attenuate development and progression of atherosclerotic plaque. The possible mechanism underlying these effects may involve EPA acting as a competitive inhibitor of arachidonic acid (AA) for cyclooxygenase and lipoxygenase enzymes. 77 This competitive inhibition results in EPA-derived compounds with slightly different structures than AA-derived compounds and, importantly, less potent inflammatory effects (Figure 4) . 78 Resolvins are a family of molecules that function as an "off switch" for inflammation, and AA and EPA both give rise to different specialized pro-resolvin mediators: AA is a precursor for lipoxins LXA 4 and LXB 4 , whereas EPA is a precursor for E-series resolvins, RvE 1 and RvE 2 . 79, 80 EPA can also compete with AA for incorporation into membrane phospholipids. 81 Thus, increasing plasma content of EPA may play a role in creating a less inflammatory environment, potentially impacting development and severity of inflammatory diseases, including atherosclerosis and other CVDs. 75, 77, 81 In addition, whereas AA has been shown to promote activity of genes in the pro-inflammatory NF-êB pathway, 82  TG biochemistry and observational data support elevated TG levels as an ASCVD risk marker, and suggest a potentially causative role. Despite this, many studies of TG-lowering modalities including niacin, fibrates, and DHA+EPA combination omega-3 fatty acids failed to demonstrate CV event risk reduction. Among factors that may have impacted CV outcomes trial results are lack of enrollment of hypertriglyceridemic patients and lack of focus on persistent TG-related CV event risk. Nonetheless, subgroup analyses from several of these studies have been hypothesis-generating, suggesting potential benefit to TG level reduction in patients with hypertriglyceridemia and providing clinical support for targeting this population, as in REDUCE-IT. In fact, a meta-analysis of 24 TG-lowering clinical trials, which included REDUCE-IT, concluded that lowering TG levels was associated with a lower risk of major J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f vascular events, even after adjusting for lowering LDL-C. 67 The effect of this meta-analysis was mostly powered by the REDUCE-IT trial. Another recent meta-analysis including REDUCE-IT concluded that data support routine dietary supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids to prevent vascular events and mortality and improve cardiometabolic risk factors. 66 The association between elevated TG and TRL levels and ASCVD risk is fueling research into treatments targeting different aspects of hypertriglyceridemia, including monoclonal antibodies that bind inhibitors of lipoprotein lipase, such as apoC3 and angiopoietin-like proteins-3 and -4. 90 Similar to those performed for PSCK9, randomized clinical trials are needed to evaluate the risks and benefits of these therapies in humans and determine whether they will best serve as adjuvant agents to statins or as primary therapies. REDUCE-IT demonstrated that icosapent ethyl 4 g, an EPA-only omega-3 fatty acid, reduced CV events in high-risk, statin-treated patients with elevated TG levels. 14 In contrast, most studies using combination DHA+EPA have not demonstrated CV event risk reduction, possibly because doses of omega-3 fatty acids in many of these prior investigations (generally ?1 g) may have been inadequate for CV event risk reduction. However, the STRENGTH trial, which was evaluating EPA+DHA 4 g daily, was recently discontinued prior to completion given that the drug was unlikely to demonstrate clinical benefit among patients with dyslipidemia. Currently, EPA is the only omega-3 fatty acid that has demonstrated ASCVD risk reduction in statin-treated patients. A possible reason for this is that, beyond its TG-lowering effects, EPA has pleiotropic anti-inflammatory and anti-thrombotic effects that may contribute to CV event risk reduction. A  