Measure what matters: counts of hospitalized patients are a better metric for health system capacity planning for a reopening
Sehj Kashyap, Saurabh Gombar, Steve Yadlowsky, Alison Callahan, Jason Fries, Benjamin Pinsky, Nigam Shah
Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic requires accurate forecasting of health system capacity requirements using readily available inputs. We examined whether testing and hospitalization All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. : medRxiv preprint data could help quantify the anticipated burden on the health system given shelter-in-place (SIP) order.
In order to prepare for COVID-19, health system leaders and policy-makers need to forecast future healthcare needs. A number of forecasting models have been developed and widely shared to help health care facilities and governments predict upcoming patient surges and plan accordingly 1,2 . These models take in a myriad of inputs including population demographics, currently admitted patients, case doubling times, and the rate at which positive cases turn into hospitalizations, among other inputs 1, 3, 4, 5 . While there are enough models, guidance and data to provide accurate inputs to these models remain lacking [6] [7] [8] . The need to accurately plan health system capacity is one of the six indicators cited to guide the state of California's decision making around reopening the state's economy 9 . An important first step is taking stock of the currently available hospitalization and testing data and how it has evolved as the pandemic progresses. Stanford Health Care (SHC), a large academic healthcare system, serves patients in the San Francisco Bay Area. The major hospitals that comprise SHC are located in Santa Clara County, which began mandated shelter-in-place (SIP) on midnight March 16, 26 days before we conducted the analysis presented here. SHC had extensive testing capacity starting on March 4 th , and since then, tested anyone who had influenza-like infection symptoms, known COVID-19 positive contact, healthcare workers with a known exposure, or by physician discretion. As of April 11th, our laboratory has tested nearly 15,800 cases, and tracked hospitalization data of the test-confirmed COVID-19 cases. Given our dual access to testing and hospitalization data, we examined whether we could reliably quantify the effects of state-mandated SIP using testing and hospitalization rates. This allowed us to quantify the divergence between the rates of positive case confirmations and All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.  3.77% of COVID-19 positive patients required an ICU admission As shown in Figure 1 , out of these 7,929 tested patients, 451 (5.68%) tested positive for COVID-19 and out of these 451 cases, 59 (13.08%) were hospitalized following their test. Among the 59 hospitalized cases, 17 (28.8% of hospitalized and 3.77% of all positive cases) required ICU care. Our observed case hospitalization rate is more in line with the 12% reported nationally than the 25.5% reported in New York City (as of April 7) 10,11 . The higher case hospitalization rate in New York may be due to the fact that low testing capacity to case numbers might have led to severe cases being prioritized for testing. Our ICU rate among confirmed cases similarly matches American national reports of 2.9%, compared to the 5% reported in China or 12% in Lombardy 12,13 . All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. Hospitalization rate slowed within 10 days of shelter-in-place even as confirmed cases continue to rise Over the past five weeks, we continue to see new COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and ICU admissions, however their rates have slowed ( Figure 2 ). The doubling time for each metric increased from under 5 days on March 16th to over 25 days as of April 11. The slowdown in hospital admissions began within 10 days of SIP, and is more dramatic than the slowdown of confirmed cases. Forecasting models should incorporate the divergence between the rate of new COVID-19 cases versus new hospitalizations to better forecast near-term demand on the health system. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020.  All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.  While most epidemic simulation models use new case rates, no currently published model takes into account the shifts in demographics of positive patients, which is a major determinant of future hospital admission rates. If most new cases are younger, the corresponding need for All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20072017 doi: medRxiv preprint hospitalizations will also be lower. Over the course of five weeks, we did not find a significant change in the age distribution of patients presenting with influenza like illness (ILI) and tested for COVID-19, however we did find a significant shift towards younger patients in those testing positive for COVID-19. The simplest explanation for the shift towards younger patients testing positive could be relaxing testing criteria. For example, guidelines at our institution went from requiring ILI symptoms and a known COVID-19 exposure, to expressing symptoms consistent with ILI, to medical doctor discretion. However, this does not explain why there is no change in the demographics of patients getting tested for COVID-19. A more plausible explanation is that because of the SIP order, the at-risk elderly population is protected and hence less likely to contract COVID-19. This interpretation is supported by the fact that despite seeing a larger number of younger COVID-19 positive patients, those that need to be admitted have similar ages, rate of ICU admission, and length of stay as before the SIP order; now we see fewer absolute numbers of such cases. Our analysis spanning 26 days after shelter-in-place clearly demonstrates that the rate of confirmed cases, hospitalizations and ICU admissions for COVID-19 has flattened. The decrease in the rate of new hospitalizations began within 10 days after shelter-in-place was initiated and continues today. Despite the decrease in hospitalizations, we continue to see new patients presenting with influenza like illness (ILI) and younger patients testing positive for COVID-19 indicating ongoing community spread; but perhaps in a lower risk population. This analysis demonstrates how--compared to new case counts--new hospitalizations is a better metric both for detecting the effect of SIP and for estimating the anticipated burden on the health system 10, 11, 14 . Our findings also suggest that existing surge planning efforts should frequently recompute hospitalization doubling time because the change can be swift as seen in All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 23, 2020. . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20072017 doi: medRxiv preprint our data 15 . Models that do not use local hospitalization rates as well as the age distribution of the positive patients are likely to overestimate the resource burden of COVID-19. Given the relative ease of obtaining such data at a health system, these metrics can not only help quantify the effects of state-mandated SIP, but also enable better planning of health system capacity to aid any reopening actions 16 . For any reopening scenario, accurate projections of near-term health system capacity requirements are essential 17 . Therefore, we must start using these easily available, and useful, inputs right away. 