Journal Pre-proofs Degradation of hydroxychloroquine by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes Degradation of hydroxychloroquine by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes
Nasr Bensalah, Sondos Midassi, Mohammad Ahmad, Ahmed Bedoui
In this work, the degradation of hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) drug in aqueous solution by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes including electrochemical oxidation (EO) using boron doped diamond (BDD) and its combination with UV irradiation (photo-assisted electrochemical oxidation, PEO) and sonication (sonoassisted electrochemical oxidation, SEO) was investigated. EO using BDD anode achieved the complete depletion of HCQ from aqueous solutions in regardless of HCQ concentration, current density, and initial pH value. The decay of HCQ was more rapid than total organic carbon (TOC) indicating that the degradation of HCQ by EO using BDD anode involves successive steps leading to the formation of organic intermediates that end to mineralize. Furthermore, the results demonstrated the release chloride (Cl -) ions at the first stages of HCQ degradation. In addition, the organic nitrogen was converted mainly into NO 3 and NH 4 + and small amounts of volatile nitrogen species (NH 3 and NO x ). Chromatography analysis confirmed the formation of 7-chloro-4-quinolinamine (CQLA), oxamic and oxalic acids as intermediates of HCQ degradation by EO using BDD anode. The combination of EO with UV irradiation or sonication enhances the kinetics and the efficacy of HCQ oxidation. PEO requires the lowest energy consumption (EC) of 63 kWh/m 3 showing its cost-effectiveness. PEO has the potential to be an excellent alternative method for the treatment of wastewaters contaminated with HCQ drug and its derivatives. Introduction. 4-aminoquinolone derivatives are widely used as drugs for the treatment of several diseases in rheumatology and dermatology [1-3]. Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), a derivative of 4-aminoquinolone, is prescribed as an antimalarial prevention drug [1] and to treat diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis [4], and systemic lupus erythematosus [5,6]. It is also used for polymorphic light eruptions and porphyria cutanea retardant [7,8]. Recently, national and international medical organizations over the word allowed the treatment of Coronavirus (COVID-19) in certain hospitalized patients by chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine [9-11]. The possible use of HCQ to treat COVID-19 is only an unproven hypothesis still being investigated. Huge amounts of HCQ are needed for the treatment of different diseases over the world. This certainly results in the discharge of large quantities of wastewaters contaminated with hydroxychloroquine into the environment. Due to its chemical and biological properties, HCQ has high potential to persist, bioaccumulate, and transfer to living organisms in intensified toxic forms [12,13]. It can also contaminate air (ozone depleting substance) [14], soil (bioaccumation in vegetation) [15,16], and groundwater (persistent substance) [16,17]. The high risks of natural water contamination due to the large production and utilization of HCQ [16,18,19], necessitates more attention to limit its hazardous effects on human health and environment. Few studies can be found in literature related to the degradation and fate of HCQ in water [12,13,20]. Mostly, the studies cited in literature have been focused on the photochemical stability of HCQ in aqueous solution and none of them investigated its removal from aqueous solution. Dabic et al. [12] investigated the abiotic degradation of HCQ in pure and natural waters by sunlight photolysis. The photodegradation of HCQ into simpler molecules was [26] P. V. Nidheesh, M. Zhou, M.A. Oturan, An overview on the removal of synthetic 87 dyes from water by electrochemical advanced oxidation processes, 88
confirmed by both High performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS) and Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy [12] ; however, the degradation products themselves can pause substantial environmental concerns due to their high toxicity and bioresistance [21] . Therefore, the search for an effective method to eliminate this micropollutant from wastewater before its discharge in natural water bodies is needed to minimize its hazardous effects. This work aims to conduct the degradation of HCQ in aqueous solution using EAOPs (Electrochemical oxidation (EO), sono-assisted electrochemical oxidation (SEO), photoassisted electrochemical oxidation (PEO)). The results offer significant information needed in the future to depollute large quantities of wastewaters contaminated with HCQ drug and its metabolites especially this drug is adopted as the first treatment of COVID-19 by many health organizations. HCQ degradation was monitored by UVvisible spectrophotometry and total organic carbon (TOC) analysis. The analysis of organic and inorganic intermediates was conducted using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and ion chromatography (IC). HCQ (7-Chloro-4-[4-[N-ethyl-N-(2-hydroxyethyl)amino]-1-methylbutyl-amino]quinolone sulfate) was purchased from Acros Organics (with purity ? 98%). 7-chloro-4quinolinamine (4-Amino-7-chloroquinoline) (CQLA) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Oxalic acid (OAA) (anhydrous, ? 98.0) and oxamic acid (OAMA) (anhydrous, ? 97.0) were received from VWR. The other chemicals used for pH adjustment and in chromatography analysis are HPLC analytical grade from Sigma Aldrich or Fluka. All aqueous solutions were prepared with deionized water obtained from Mill-Q TM system having > 18 M? cm ?1 resistivity. All the samples withdrawn at desired times, underwent a filtration through 0.2 ìm membrane filters before analysis. The pH was monitored using a pH-meter (Seven Compact S210, METTLER TOLEDO®). TOC and total nitrogen (TN) analysis was conducted using Skalar Formacs HT TOC/TN analyzer. UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer Lambda 5) was used for rapid measurements of HCQ concentration at 340 nm using a 1 cm-quartz cells. Chloride and nitrate ions were monitored using Dionex ICS 2000 ion chromatograph equipped with EGC eluent generator, Ion Pac AS 19 (4mm 250mm) analytical separation column, ASRS 300mm-4mm suppressor, and DS6 conductometric cell. Ammonium ions were analyzed by ion-selective electrode for ammonium ion (ELIT 8051 PVC membrane). HCQ and CQLA concentrations were measured by HPLC using Shimadzu 20A Gradient LC System with UV-VIS Detector equipped with Shim-pack GWS C18 (150x4.6, 5 um) separation column. The separation was performed using a mobile phase composed of a mixture of eluent A (0.1% H 3 PO 4 in water) and eluent B (acetonitrile, CH 3 CN) in gradient elution mode at a fixed flow rate of 1 mL/min and constant column temperature at 40 °C. By injecting 10 ?L of each sample, the gradient elution begun with 90 % of eluent A during 5 min, then eluent A decreased to 40% within 15 min, and after that the elution gradient remains constant (40% A+60% B) until the end of analysis. The UV detector was set at a wavelength of 340 nm. Oxalic and oxamic acids were measured by HPLC using a Supelcogel H column (mobile phase, 0.15% phosphoric acid solution; flow rate, 0.15 mL/min) with UV detection at 210 nm. Linear calibration curves based on external standardization were obtained in chromatography analysis for all analytes with regression coefficients higher than 98%. A single compartment electrochemical flow cell working in batch-operation mode was used to perform all experiments (see Figure 1 ). BDD anodes were purchased from Adamant Technologies (Neuchatel, Switzerland). They were fabricated by hot filament chemical vapor deposition (HF CVD) technique of boron-doped diamond thin film deposited on single-crystal p-type Si (100) substrates (0.1 ? cm Siltronix) as described elsewhere [51] . The BDD coating has a film thickness of 2 ?m, a resistivity of 100 m? cm, and a boron concentration of 500 ppm, and the sp 3 /sp 2 ratio is 150. Stainless steel (AISI 304) was used as cathode material for all the electrolytic tests. Circular electrodes More than 60% of HCQ can be removed by EO using BDD anode after 1h for initial pH values in the range 2.0 -12.0. As can be seen, the percentage of HCQ removals were 78.4, 77.9, 74.4, 68.1, and 60.3 % for initial pH values of 2.1, 4.2, 7.1, 9.0, and 12.1, respectively. It seems that acidic, slightly acidic, and neutral initial pH resulted in better EO performance in terms of HCQ removal than alkaline initial conditions. This can be correlated to the changes of pH during the electrochemical oxidation of HCQ with BDD anode as shown in Figure 4 .b. As can be observed, the pH abruptly declined at beginning the treatment, then it stabilized (except for pH = 2.1, pH remained constant). For initial alkaline pH, the pH stabilized at values between 6 and 7, while for neutral and acid initial values of pH, it reached values lower than pH 4. The decrease of pH at the beginning of the treatment can be explained by the formation of acid intermediates during EO of HCQ [56] . HCQ has three functional groups with pKa values of < 4.0, 8.3, and 9.7 [57,58]. At acid and neutral conditions, two of the functional groups exist in protonated forms, which may facilitate the rupture of C -N bonds by HO ? radicals attack and thus release the branched group. Furthermore, because small differences were observed in HCQ depletion yield for pH in the range (2-7), the detailed HCQ degradation was studied at pH 7.1 to minimize the additional costs related to preacidification and post-neutralization steps in the overall process.  In order to improve the performance of the electrochemical treatment of HCQ in aqueous solution and reduce the energy requirements, the electrochemical oxidation using BDD was combined with sonication (SEO) and UV irradiation (PEO). As can be seen from Figure 7  This work confirmed that EO using BDD anode is an effective EAOP to completely deplete HCQ in aqueous solution at different operating conditions (current density, initial pH, and HCQ concentration). Low current densities results in better efficacy of EO using BDD due to mass transport limitations and less competitive parasitic reactions. The degradation of HCQ by EO using BBD anode leads to the formation of aromatic intermediates such 4-quinolinamine and carboxylic acids (i.e. oxamic and oxalic acids) that undergo several oxidative stages accompanied with the release of Cl -, NO 3 -, and NH 4 + ions to finally end to be mostly mineralized. The coupling of EO using BDD with UV irradiation (PEO) and sonication (SEO) significantly improves the kinetics and the efficiency of HCQ oxidation and TOC removal. The degradation intermediates (OAMA and OAA) were depleted quickly when combined EO with UV irradiation or sonication were used to oxidize HCQ in aqueous solution. This is probably due to the activation of the electrogenerated strong oxidants (persulfates) to produce supplementary radical species capable to contribute with the hydroxyl radicals in the oxidation of HCQ drug and its intermediates. In addition, PEO seems to be the most cost-effective process since lower EC and Q were required to realize same depletion yields of HCQ and TOC. These results demonstrate that combined EAOPs have the potential to be implemented in large scale to eliminate HCQ from water. [  