Journal Pre-proof Quantifying the Risk of Indoor Drainage System in Multi-unit Apartment Building as a Transmission Route of SARS-CoV-2 Kuang
Wei Shi, Yen-Hsiang Huang, Hunter Quon, Zi-Lu Ou-Yang, Chengwen Wang, Sunny Jiang
empty
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic 1 caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has had a profound impact on human society and the world economy [2] [3] . Despite the time and money invested in COVID-19 research and medical treatments around the world 4-8 , at the time of this writing, the diverse routes of transmission and effective treatment methods for this disease are still unclear. The fecal-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has been a concern 9 since the first detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from patients' feces 10 . However, the infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 in feces and its hazard to human health is an ongoing debate although high concentrations of viral RNA have been found in both patient's feces [11] [12] [13] and in human sewage 14 . Only a handful of papers 10, [15] [16] [17] reported the isolation of infectious viruses from feces on human tissue culture. The most recent report by Zang et al. 13 provides evidence of SARS-CoV-2 replication in human small intestine but shows that most of  Many studies reported the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in COVID-19 patients' feces 11-12, 16, 18, 32-35 . At the time of this analysis, only a handful of the studies quantified viral load in human feces using qPCR 11-12, 16, 32 . Pan et al. 32 reported 9 of 17 positive samples with a range of viral concentrations between 10 3 and 10 5 genome copies (gc) of viral RNA/mL of liquid stool sample (Table S1 ). The viral load varied over the course of the disease but was within 2 orders of magnitude. Wolfel et al. 11 reported positive detection in 68 of 81 samples over 21 days for multiple COVID-19 patients. The SARS-CoV-2 concentrations ranged between 10 2 and over 10 7 gc/ gram of feces (Table S1 ). More recently, Zheng et al. 12 followed patients for 60 days and detected 55 positive samples among 93 samples tested and reported the concentration in the range of less than 10 2 and over 10 8 gc/mL of feces (Table S1 ). Xiao et al. 16 followed a single patient and quantified the viral load in feces by qPCR but used a standard curve based on known plaque forming unit (pfu). The viral load was expressed as pfu equivalence /mL of feces but indicated that fecal viral load does not necessarily imply infectivity. The raw data reported in Pan et al. 32 were provided to this study by the authors upon request. Individual data points from each of the other three reports were extracted from published figures using GetData Graph Digitizer 36 . In addition, a SARS-CoV-2 concentration of 19 gc/m 3 of air measured directly in the aerosol from a hospital toilet room was also included in the analysis 18 . The data described above are compiled in Table S1 and the viral concentration in aerosols was assumed to be produced solely from flushing patients' feces down the toilet. To compare and contrast SARS-CoV-2 viral load in feces, we also searched and compiled data for SARS-CoV-1. As shown in Table S1 , SARS-CoV-1 viral loads varied more J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Journal Pre-proof significantly over the course of disease according to three different studies [37] [38] [39] . The SARS-CoV-1 concentration expanded over 6 orders of magnitude among different individuals and at different stages of disease. Note that the viral concentration was reported as liquid volume of feces except in the study by Wolfel et al. 11 , in which viral RNA gc/gram was given (Table S1 ). Wolfel et al. 11 indicated that the COVID-19 patients included in the study only had very mild symptoms and diarrhea was uncommon. To compile the data set, the values in per gram of feces were transformed to values in per mL using a fecal density of 0.97 g/mL 40 . The fecal viral concentration for both SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 were plotted in histograms and fitted with a cumulative density function curve shown in Fig. 2 . The negative detections in each report were treated as below the lowest detection limit of 1.95 log 10 gc/mL by qPCR assay (Table S2) . The values were generated by randomly sampling a uniform distribution U(0,1.95) for the fraction of negative detection reported (Fig. 2) . Similarly, the below detection values for SARS-CoV-1 data were generated using U(0,0.35). The three data points from Xiao et al. 16 was not included in the SARS-CoV-2 data distribution curve because they were expressed as pfu/mL. Instead a triangular (2.52, 2.97, 3.37) distribution was used to capture the range of viral load from this report (Table S2 ). The only direct toilet room aerosol measurement of 19 gc/m 3 air was used as a single point estimate in risk analysis to represent an event as "aerosol measurement". Table S1 and S2 in Data in Supporting Information for data source). Note that the left side of cumulative distribution curve includes negative detection data from each report, which was presented as randomly generated data points using uniform distribution from zero to lower detection limit (doted vertical line). An empirical distribution of human fecal volume (range 82 to 196mL, mean 135mL) per day 40 and a uniform(3.78, 6.00) distribution of flushing water 41 were used to estimate the concentration of virus in toilet water after defecation. The fraction of the infectious SARS-CoV-2 among reported genome equivalent viral RNA in feces is an important uncertainty. J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Previous studies of SARS-CoV-1 reported a wide range of conversion factor for viral genome number to infections unit (pfu), from 360:1 to 1600:1 [42] [43] . To include the uncertainty, a triangular(360, 980, 1600) distribution was used to capture the variability of this parameter (Table S2 ). Note that this conversion was not applied to the data reported by Xiao et al. 16 since the fecal load was presented as pfu/mL. In the toilet, the patient's stool was assumed to be completely mixed with flushing water. Thus, viral concentration in the flushing water after  where represents infectious units per viral gc (pfu/gc), and 10 ?3 is the unit conversion factor from per milliliter to per liter. Aerosols generated from toilet flushing were assumed to contain the same viral concentration as the toilet water post defecation. The detailed data and assumptions are presented in Table S2 . Two exposure scenarios were considered to represent the generic living conditions in a multi-unit apartment building. The first scenario considers a shared bathroom by two suitemates in the same apartment suite. One resident is a COVID-19 patient under self-quarantine in J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Journal Pre-proof his/her own room. The second scenario considers a COVID-19 patient under self-quarantine in an isolated apartment in the building. A neighbor in the apartment one floor below the patient's apartment shares the main sewer soil-stack and has a floor drain missing water-seal to block the aerosol from the sewer pipe (Fig. 1 ). Under scenario 1, the aerosol concentration in the toilet room generated after a toilet flushing was adopted from a study by O'Toole et al. 44 . Since the aerosol concentrations were collected at different heights above the toilet in the original study, we adopted data collected at a sampling height of 420 mm above the toilet to represent aerosol concentrations inhaled by a person when using the toilet (Table S3) . O'Toole et al. 44 also showed a bimodal distribution of two median diameter aerosol sizes, d 1 =0.6 ìm and d 2 =2.5 ìm, at this height 44 . Although several other studies [45] [46] also reported the mass of aerosols generated by toilet flushing, the data were not comparable with the O'Toole et al. 44 due to different types of toilet and different measurement approaches. These data were not included in aerosol estimation due to the need for assumptions of air volume and dispersion rate in the toilet room, which could induce additional uncertainty. The decay of SARS-CoV-2 in the toilet-generated aerosols was computed using the half-life of 2.7 hours reported by van Doremalen et al. 29 . The healthy suitemate was assumed to be exposed to contaminated aerosols once a day between 0 and 2 hours after the patient flushed the fecal waste using U(0,2). The risk of exposure declines with the time after the prior flush due to viral decay in aerosols. The aerosol deposition efficiencies in human respiratory tract were derived from Heyder's study 47 , which was reported as a function of particle size and breathing patterns. The aerosol J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f inhalation efficiency was based on an individuals' breathing pattern during light activities 48 . The duration of exposure for the healthy individual was set using a uniform distribution of 10 to 30 minutes U (10, 30) to represent the various activities from urination to defecation and hand washing in the bathroom. The dose of virus ( , , in pfu/case) inhaled and deposited in the healthy resident's respiratory tract under the toilet flushing scenario was estimated using equation 3: where , is the mass of aerosol according to median diameter size (d i , in ) deposited in the exposed person's respiratory tract (L/L of air), is the decay rate of virus in aerosols (unitless), is the mean flow rate of air breathed by the exposed person (L of air/min), and is the time spent in the toilet room each exposure event (min/case). The  where 0 is the interval between the prior toilet flushing of patient's feces and the healthy suitemate using the toilet room (min), and ? is the half-life of the SARS-CoV-1 or J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol (min) according to van Doremalen et al. 29 . Parameters and assumptions used are summarized in Table S3 . In this scenario, aerosols containing virus were assumed to be generated from the same flushing water and were suspending along the entire sewer soil-stack after the waste passed through the pipe. The aerosols in the sewer pipe were characterized once again by data from O'Toole's study 44 for samples collected immediately above the toilet (50 mm). The aerosol volume in the sewer pipe equals the volume of the pipe between two apartments (0.1 m diameter and 2.8 m long between two floors). A worst-case assumption was made that all contaminated aerosols in the sewer pipe was drew into the toilet room at the apartment one-story below through a floor drain that is missing the water-seal ( Table S3 . The doses of exposure under different scenarios were compared. The simulated doses from fecal viral load were also compared with the exposure dose calculated using the SARS-CoV-2 concentration measured directly from the hospital toilet room 18 . Moreover, the model derived dose for SARS-CoV-1 under faulty drain scenario was compared to the dose estimated by Watanabe et al. 49 in Amoy Gardens using a back calculation of attack rate and the dose-response model. There has not been a dose-response model developed for SARS-CoV-2 for human or animals. SARS-CoV-2 shares 79% nucleic acid sequence identity to SARS-CoV-1, and uses the same cell entry receptor (ACE2) as SARS-CoV-1 50 . Structural analysis revealed SARS-CoV-2 protein binds ACE2 with 10-20 folds higher affinity than SARS-CoV-1, which indicates that SARS-CoV-2 may be more infectious to humans than SARS-CoV-1 50 . Moreover, SARS-CoV-2 triggers receptor dependent cell-cell fusion that helps the virus rapidly spread from cell-to-cell 51 . The basic reproductive values (R0) of COVID-19 at the early stage were calculated between 2 and 3.5, indicating that infected people on average could infect two to more than three other people, which was higher than SARS 52 . The effective reproduction number may be much lower due to less-susceptible hosts such as young adults 4, 53-54 . This infective pattern of SARS-CoV-2 is highly similar to SARS-CoV-1 55 . Based on the comparative biological property of the two viruses, we adopted SARS-CoV-1 dose-response model 49  The parameters used in the dose-response assessments are presented in (Table S4 ). To estimate the risk of developing COVID-19 by the suitemate or the downstairs neighbor, we assume a once-a-day encounter rate of polluted aerosols over a 15-day course of disease (Table S4 ). The estimations were carried out using equation 9 and the illness rate for COVID-19 was compared to the simulated outcomes for SARS, to provide a relative risk perspective. Where is the extension of the course of COVID-19 assuming 15 days (day), is the frequency of a scenario occurring in a day (event/day). Moreover, the aerosol concentration measured directly in the toilet room used by multiple COVID-19 patients in a Wuhan hospital of 19 genome copies/m 3 air 18 was included in the risk estimation to represent the worst case scenario of COVID-19 transmission. The risk estimation J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f using data from Xiao et al. 16 , where the fecal viral shedding was presented as pfu/mL, was presented separately. The pseudo-algorithm information flow is shown in Figure S1 . The input parameters were randomly sampled from their established probability distributions. 100,000 iterations of each output parameter were computed to ensure the distributions reach a steady state. Reproducibility of the outputs is examined by a variation of less than 1% 56 . All computations were carried using MATLAB R2019b 57 . A sensitivity analysis was conducted to determine which model inputs were the most influential contributors to the predicted illness risk. The rank of importance was introduced through incorporation of parameter sensitivity with the relative order of uncertainty to assess the confidence in the model. The importance factor ( ) contributing to illness risk for each input parameter (unitless) was calculated using equation 10: where is the sensitivity of illness risk related to the input parameter (unitless), and is the coefficient of variation of the input parameter (unitless). was incorporated to represent the uncertainty of input parameter distribution, and was calculated using equation 12: where is the standard deviation of the input parameter. J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f The exposure doses of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 per event under different scenarios are presented in Fig. 3 . The simulated doses based on fecal load had a bimodal distribution because of the inclusion of non-detectable results. The median values for SARS-CoV-1 and 2 were similar, in the range of 1.15 to 8.45 x 10 -9 pfu per exposure event (see Table S5 for summary descriptors). However, comparing the two viruses, SARS-CoV-1 had a wide range of exposure dose with a long flat tail (95 th percentile is 1.58 x 10 -3 pfu for toilet flushing scenario) on the right side of the distribution curve ( Fig. 3 and Table S5 ). Using fecal load data reported by Xiao et al. 16 (in pfu/mL) to calculate the exposure dose shifted the median exposure dose to the right by over 2 to 3 log10 units (Fig. 3 , Table S5 ). However, this exposure dose was likely an overestimation of infectious SARS-CoV-2 because the authors of the fecal shedding study indicated that the pfu equivalent numbers reported do not indicate infectivity number 16 . It is important to note that the pfu equivalent presented in Xiao et al. is not the same as the viral infectious unit presented elsewhere in the study. The worst case scenario of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 was represented by exposure to an aerosol concentration measured directly in the hospital's toilet room (Fig. 3) . The median exposure dose of this scenario was 5.34 x 10 -5 pfu per exposure event (Table S5 ). There is a dramatic mismatch when comparing the exposure dose estimated based on any of the scenario with the exposure dose calculated by Watanabe et al. 49 2) Our aerosol concentrations are underestimated by several orders of magnitude. Since the initial infectious viral load (pfu) in feces is a sensitive input parameter that influences the aerosol dose in the toilet room, the major uncertainty could be from the conversion of viral genome copy to infectious unit. We used SARS-CoV-1 as the surrogate to get the conversion factor from laboratory studies by different researchers [42] [43] . We used triangular distribution to derive the range. The outcomes of the conversion were ~100 times lower than the report presented by Xiao et al. 16 Fig. 4 shows the outcomes of risk estimation for different scenarios. The median COVID-19 illness risk for a single day exposure is 1.11 x 10 -10 and 3.52 x 10 -11 for toilet flushing (Fig 4a and Table S6a ) and faulty drain (Fig 4b and Table S6a ) scenario, respectively. These values are nearly one log higher in comparison with the SARS illness risk predicted using SARS-CoV-1 fecal loading estimation, which have a median value of 1.75 x 10 -11 for toilet flushing and 5.5 x 10 -12 for the faulty drain scenario (Table S6a) Table   S6a ). The estimates for exposure to contaminated aerosols in the hospital toilet room yielded a median risk value of 1.9 x 10 -6 and 95 th percentile risk of 3.85 x 10 -5 for each single exposure (Table 6a) . When multiple exposures were considered over the 15-day course of the disease, assuming once a day exposure frequency, the estimated risk of COVID-19 increased by approximately one log for all scenarios (Fig 4c, d and Table S6b ). Again, these values were about one log higher than median illness risks for SARS under the same scenarios but SARS outcomes spanned a much greater range (Fig. 4 c, d and Table 6S ). The worst case scenario, exposure to aerosol in a hospital toilet room used by multiple patients, predicted the high end of COVID-19 risk for toilet flushing scenario at 5.78 x 10 -4 (95 th percentile). Comparing risks from the toilet flushing with the faulty drain scenario, it's obvious that direct exposure to aerosols generated J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f from toilet flushing had greater risk than exposure to aerosols entered from a faulty drain in the building (Fig. 4) . These risk estimates are at odds with the conclusion of Amoy Gardens' investigation, where the epidemiological study presented a very different picture, a much higher attack rate from the faulty drain scenario. The uncertainties of a number of input parameters in the model are worthy of analysis to offer better insights into the discrepancies observed from the two investigations. These input parameters include the concentration of viruses in the feces, the conversion factor from genome equivalent of virus to infectious unit, the daily fecal volume, the toilet flushing water volume, the aerosols generated during toilet flushing, the duration of exposure in the toilet room, the viral decay and the best fit parameter for dose-response model. The analyses for model uncertainties were assessed using the joint estimation of local sensitivity of each parameter and the coefficient of variant for the parameter to evaluate the relative order of uncertainty. Note that the analysis was only carried out for models starting with genome equivalent SARS-CoV-2 fecal loadings. The single aerosol measurement from the hospital toilet room was not a good representation of the normal living condition in the multi-unit apartment building and only presented here as the worst case scenario. The results showed that the concentration of genome equivalent virus in toilet flushing water ( , , 2 ) was the most important input parameter in the risk estimation for both scenarios (Fig. 5) . Variability of this parameter contributed to 48% of the variability of model outcome and represented the most uncertainty. The conversion factor (PFU/GC) that bridges the genome copies of virus to pfu of the infectious virus, in comparison, was only a minor contributor (1 to 2% of variability) to the overall model outcome (Fig. 5) . in the faulty drain scenario. We initially expected the conversion factor from genome copy virus to infectious virus pfu was a major source of model uncertainty since determining the concentration of infectious SARS-CoV-2 in the fecal samples had been challenging 11 . The above analyses showed, however, the wide range of the viral load in the fecal shedding played an important role. In the effort of the data collection, we focused on literature that provided quantitative analysis of fecal loading in patients at different stage of the disease development and from different regions. We also included data reported as non-detection by setting the lower detection limit as the upper bound to generate estimations using a uniform distribution between zero and the detection limit. The SARS-CoV-2 data compiled here represent the state of knowledge and are comparable with SARS-CoV-1 data, which served as a proxy for the new virus. J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f Figure S2 . The analysis showed that based on reported cases and fecal viral load, the median concentration of SARS-CoV-2 was estimated to be 1.25log 10 gc/L of raw sewage without including viral decay during transport from households to NCWTP (Table S7 ). If assuming reported cases were only 50% of the total number of cases in the community (due to underreporting, asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic cases), the 49 . Therefore, this analysis suggests additional routes of transmission may have contributed to Amoy Gardens outbreak 59 . The risk estimation presented relatively low median health risks of two viral transmission scenarios through  