Journal Pre-proof Efficacy of glutathione therapy in relieving dyspnea associated with COVID-19 pneumonia: A report of 2 cases Manuscript title in sentence case: Efficacy of Glutathione Therapy in Relieving Dyspnea Associated with COVID-19 Pneumonia: A Report of 2 Cases
Richard Horowitz, Phyllis Freeman, James Bruzzese
Purpose: Infection with COVID-19 potentially can result in severe outcomes and death from "cytokine storm syndrome", resulting in novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP) with severe dyspnea, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), fulminant myocarditis and multiorgan dysfunction with or without disseminated intravascular coagulation. No published treatment to date has been shown to adequately control the inflammation and respiratory symptoms associated with COVID-19, apart from oxygen therapy and assisted ventilation. We evaluated the effects of using high dose oral and/or IV glutathione in the treatment of 2 patients with dyspnea secondary to COVID-19 pneumonia.
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) first identified in Wuhan, China is responsible for the coronavirus disease outbreak of 2019 (COVID- 19) , now declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization (WHO) as of March of 2020 1 . Among the CoV's known to cause human disease, the three most highly pathogenic of the group include the SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV now named SARS-CoV-1) 2 , the Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronavirus (MERS-CoV) 3 and SARS-CoV-2, the agent of COVID-19, identified in patients with severe pneumonia in Wuhan, China 4 . Early prodromal symptoms of infection with COVID-19 include anosmia, hyposmia and dysgeusia 5 followed days later by fever (91.7%), cough (75.0%) and shortness of breath, fatigue (75.0%) and gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhea (39.6%) 6 . A sore throat, headache, myalgias and rarely conjunctivitis has also been reported 7 as well as episodes of confusion 8 . This is similar to the clinical picture of MERS, where a fever, chills, cough, sore throat, wheezing, shortness of breath, myalgia, chest pain, gastro-intestinal symptoms (diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain) and confusion may result 9 . Although exposure to COVID-19 is asymptomatic or mild in most affected of younger age, those at highest risk for fulminant disease have been identified as having certain risk factors. These factors include advanced age and a smoking history 10 , male gender 11 , race (African-American) 12 ,as well as prior medical problems including hypertension, cardiac disease, obesity, hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke, underlying respiratory illness (asthma, emphysema), cancer, immunosuppression, secondary infections as well as chronic kidney and liver disease 13 14 15 . More than 100,000 people have died worldwide in the COVID-19 pandemic as of April 10, 2020 according to recent data from Johns Hopkins University 16 . As of April 11, 2020, almost 1.7 million people worldwide have been infected 17 with global mortality rates over time leveling off to a higher rate of 5.7% converging with current WHO estimates 18 . These statistics reveal that we may have underestimated the potential threat of COVID-19, and that rapid, effective testing strategies and treatments are essential, especially among those with severe respiratory complications and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Among the sickest patients and most common reasons for admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) during the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in the Seattle area were hypoxemic respiratory failure leading to mechanical ventilation, hypotension requiring vasopressor treatment, or both 19 . Mortality among these critically ill patients was high. The ICU mortality rate among those who required non-invasive ventilation in one case series in China was 79% and among those who required invasive mechanical ventilation was 86% 15 . The fundamental pathophysiology of infection with COVID-19 potentially resulting in such critical outcomes is "cytokine storm syndrome" with ARDS and fulminate myocarditis 20 with multiorgan dysfunction 7 acute kidney injury, liver dysfunction, and pneumothorax 21 . A hyperinflammatory syndrome known as secondary hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH) or macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) can also result from fulminant and fatal hypercytokinemia 22 . Pulmonary involvement in patients with HLH/MAS revealed that dyspnea and cough were the most common symptoms at the onset of the disease, and radiographs revealed interstitial infiltrates with centrilobular nodules, ill-defined consolidation, or localized ground-glass opacities 23 . Similar radiological abnormalities are seen in patients who recovered from COVID-19 pneumonia, where initial lung findings on chest CT revealed small subpleural ground glass opacities (GGO) that grew larger with crazy-paving pattern and consolidation up to two weeks after disease onset, eventually being absorbed resulting in extensive GGO and subpleural parenchymal bands 24 . Chest radiographs and imaging results of patients with MERS Cov also have also shown features that resemble the findings of organizing pneumonia, which are different however from SARS, which show more of a fibrocellular intra-alveolar organization with a bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia-like pattern 9 . Despite differences in initial presentation, ARDS has been reported to be the main cause of death in COVID-19 15 , resulting from an uncontrolled systemic inflammatory response releasing large amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines as well as chemokines by immune effector cells 25 . This is similar to the pathophysiology seen with SARS , i.e., immune cell injury-based damage with widespread organ involvement 26 , with unbalanced cytokine and chemokine profiles 27 28 . Addressing the immune based lung pathology seen in COVID-19, similar to that seen in ARDS, might help to decrease morbidity and mortality. ARDS is caused by lung inflammation and increased alveolar endothelial and epithelial permeabilities 29 leading to a protein-rich pulmonary edema that causes severe hypoxemia and impaired carbon dioxide excretion 30 . The lung injury is non-cardiogenic in nature and caused primarily by neutrophil-dependent and platelet-dependent damage to the endothelial and epithelial barriers of the lung, frequently caused by pneumonia 30 . A procoagulant effect with coagulopathy and anti-phospholipid antibodies has also recently been reported in patients with COVID-19 31 , associated with a poorer prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia (NCP) 32 . Supportive measures in the management of ARDS have included attention to fluid balance, restrictive transfusion strategies, and minimization of sedatives and neuromuscular blocking agents, along with inhaled bronchodilators which have been shown to confer short term improvement without proven effect on survival 33 . Release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF), interleukin 1 beta (IL-1т), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and interleukin 8 (IL-8) which in turn recruit components of the innate immune system have been shown to be associated with ARDS 34 35 . Neutrophils are recruited to the lungs by these cytokines, which then become activated and release toxic mediators 36 , leading to extensive free radical production and reactive oxygen species which overwhelms endogenous anti-oxidants resulting in oxidative cell damage to lung tissue 37 . Pharmacological therapies that have been tried to date include nitric oxide, inhaled prostacycline, vasoconstrictors and anti-inflammatory agents including corticosteroids. Corticosteroids, however, have been shown to have no benefit and even cause harm 33 . Activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) has been shown to be required for transcription of the genes for many of the pro-inflammatory mediators associated with ARDS 38 where NF-ъB plays a key role in the orchestration of the multifaceted inflammatory response. This is both in the pro-inflammatory phase and later in the regulation of the resolution of inflammation when anti-inflammatory genes are expressed 39 . Antioxidant therapies including N-acetyl-c Newton ysteine (NAC) 40 , alpha lipoic acid (ALA) 41 42 and glutathione have all been reported to regulate NFKappaB signaling 43 and downregulate NF-kappaB 44 . To date there are no clinical trials using either precursors of glutathione (NAC) or PO/IV glutathione for COVID-19 dyspnea, pneumonia or ARDS. Prior published, controlled clinical trials with NAC demonstrated that patients with ARDS have depressed plasma and red cell glutathione concentrations. These levels are substantially increased by therapy with intravenous NAC with measurable clinical responses to treatment regarding increased oxygen delivery, improved lung compliance and resolution of pulmonary edema 45 . The alveolar epithelial lining fluid of patients with ARDS has also been shown to be deficient in total GSH compared to normal subjects, where reactive oxygen species may play a key role in the pathogenesis of the acute lung injury with ARDS 46 . Since patients with ARDS are subjected to an increased burden of oxidants in the alveolar fluid, principally released by recruited neutrophils, this deficiency of GSH may predispose these patients to enhanced lung cell injury. Glutathione is one of the body's master antioxidants which has been shown to play an important role in antioxidant defense, nutrient metabolism, and regulation of cellular events, including cytokine production and immune response 47 . We therefore performed a trial of glutathione precursors, i.e. NAC, antioxidants (alpha lipoic acid, Vitamin C) along with 2-gram doses of PO and/or IV glutathione in 2 patients suffering from dyspnea associated with COVID-19 pneumonia who were previously on antibiotic treatment for COVID 19 pneumonia with mixed results. A screening questionnaire for COVID-19 was used to track daily symptoms. The initial COVID-19 screening questionnaire and follow-up form included the following symptoms that were tracked during the course of illness: loss of sense of smell and/or taste; sore throat; fever, sweats, chills; cough (and whether it was dry or productive with associated shortness of breath); pulse oximetry readings if available, measured both without and with oxygen via nasal cannula; diarrhea; nasal congestion, sneezing, rhinorrhea; conjunctivitis; headaches; myalgias and/or arthralgias; and memory or concentration problems. By day 17 (day 24 post exposure), his cough had resolved with no further dyspnea and body aches and headaches were also significantly improved. The only symptom that occasionally returned were night sweats with "air hunger" and a very mild, lingering cough which was intermittent. No other associated prior symptoms relapsed from COVID-19. After a detailed discussion, the patient reported that the present symptoms were more suggestive of a reactivation of babesiosis he had experienced years prior. Since there were no associated fevers, worsening cough, or significant dyspnea, and laboratory testing was presently unavailable, the patient was placed atovaquone/proguanil 100/250 mg 4 tablets QD ? 3 days, followed by 2 PO BID, along with oral glutathione at a dose of 2 g up to twice a day PRN for shortness of breath. The patient continued to improve on this protocol. Alka seltzer gold, along with alpha lipoic acid 600 mg, and N-acetylcysteine 1200 mg. The patient saw immediate improvement described as "being able to breath better and having more energy" within an hour of use. After administration of the glutathione, the cough resolved and she was able to sleep through the night for the first time since the onset of illness, despite having been on her antibiotic regimen for several days. She was also able to take a deep breath for the first time. The following morning after administration of 2000 mg of PO glutathione for a second time, the patient was able to ambulate, perform activities of daily living, and shower without pre-syncopal episodes arising from dyspnea. This was the first time she could perform activities of daily living since the onset of her illness. The following day, additional doses of glutathione were given, one time at a lower dose of 500 mg PO, which did not have the same therapeutic effects as the higher dose of 2000 mg of GSH. All doses of glutathione administered to the patient were liposomal doses; and were subsequently administered at 2,000 mg PO due to superior efficacy. Since that time, 5 days after receiving initial doses of GSH, the patient remained well and symptom free. As antibody tests were not readily available in NYC at the time of presentation, the patient was only able to receive a PCR test for COVID-19 two weeks after initiation of symptoms when she was asymptomatic, which was PCR negative. Several key clinical symptoms suggested a high likelihood of exposure to COVID-19 in our patients, including the constellation of early prodromal symptoms of anosmia, hyposmia, and dysgeusia, along with a fever, sore throat, cough and shortness of breath. Apart from neurodegenerative diseases, the three major causes of a loss of smell are trauma, rhinosinusitis/nasal polyps, and viral infections 48 . Olfactory and gustatory dysfunctions have now been reported as a clinical presentation of mild-to-moderate forms of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) 49 . COVID-19 risk factors include those with immunosuppression and underlying infections 13 15 . Patients with active Lyme disease can be immunosuppressed with immunoglobulin and subclass deficiencies 50 as well as potentially having multiple sources of inflammation driving the inflammatory process 51 . This needs to be considered in the list of risk factors potentially complicating treatment outcomes. For example, patient one was also diagnosed with elevated levels of mercury before contracting COVID-19, known to increase free radical/oxidative stress 52 Patients who suffer from Lyme disease and relapsing fever borreliosis oftentimes experience Herxheimer reactions once antibiotics are initiated 55 which has been shown to be due to the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF, IL-6, and IL-8 56 . These are some of the same cytokines expressed during viral infection with COVID-19 24 . Glutathione and alkalizing the body to decrease acidic byproducts has been shown to be helpful in decreasing symptomatology in this population of patients 57 . Glutathione metabolism has also been discovered to be the most important target of B. burgdorferi infection, and this pathway is essential for cytokine production, likely through glutathionylation 58 . Glutathione and GSH precursors (NAC) with antioxidants that help regenerate GSH (alpha lipoic acid) have been an effective mainstay of treating cytokine storms and Herxheimer reactions in our tick-borne population for decades 59 60 . Both patients took glutathione for the first time on day ten/eleven, during the peak stage of their illness. According to recent published research 61 , patients without severe respiratory distress during the disease course have lung abnormalities on chest CT of greatest severity approximately 10 days after the initial onset of symptoms. Both patients therefore had significant benefit with high-dose oral glutathione relieving their dyspnea during the peak stage of their illness. Our patients were also given zinc, 40-50 mg per day, and Vitamin C 1-2 grams TID. Zinc is known to play a central role in the immune system, and zinc-deficient persons experience increased susceptibility to a variety of pathogens 62 . Zinc is crucial for normal development and function of cells mediating nonspecific immunity such as neutrophils and natural killer cells 62 and after zinc supplementation, the incidence of infections, generation of tumor necrosis factor alpha and oxidative stress markers has been shown to be significantly lower in the zinc-supplemented than in the placebo group. Zinc supplementation in healthy human subjects also reduced the concentrations of the oxidative stress-related byproducts in the plasma; inhibited the ex vivo induction of TNF-с and IL-1т mRNA in mononuclear cells (MNCs) 63 ; and provided protection against TNF-с-induced nuclear factor-ът activation in isolated mononuclear cells 64 . Macrophages are adversely affected by zinc deficiency, which can dysregulate intracellular killing, and cytokine production 63 . We also used Vitamin C, another major free radical scavenger with alpha lipoic acid and NAC. In the immune system, the major role of Vitamin C appears to be as an antioxidant, protecting host cells against oxidative stress caused by infections 65 , especially infections affecting the lungs 65 66 . Other effects of Vitamin C include increased functioning of phagocytes, proliferation of T-lymphocytes and production of interferon, while decreasing the replication of viruses 67 . Alpha lipoic was administered simultaneously with Vitamin C, which apart from being an antioxidant and inhibiting airway inflammation 41 , increases GSH through release from oxidized glutathione, increasing GSH synthesis, while activating the transcription factor Nrf2, and lowering expression of NF-kappa B 68 . Finally, NAC, a precursor of glutathione, was given at PO doses ranging from 1200 to 2400 mg/day, as it has been shown to lower the inflammatory response in patients with community acquired pneumonia in a randomized controlled trial 69 while increasing intracellular GSH and improving acute respiratory distress syndrome 70 . Glutathione is abundant in most cells, but is the most abundant antioxidant in the airway epithelial lining fluid, and acts as a vital intra-and extracellular antioxidant protecting against oxidative stress, helping to decrease pro-inflammatory processes in the lungs 71 . It has a rapid turnover and is quickly replenished by: (1) de novo synthesis by sequential action of two enzymes. The first, GCS (gamma-glutamyl-cysteine synthesase (ligase) is rate limiting and normally functions at substantially less than its maximum capacity because of feedback inhibition by GSH, while responding rapidly to GSH requirements 47 . 73 , helping to lower inflammation 74 75 . Elderly patients have been shown to have an increased risk from exposure to COVID-19 13 . GCS activity decreases with age and from reduced recycling of reduced GSH from GSSG. With an adequate supply of cysteine, cells can have a large reserve capacity to increase GSH production and counter oxidative stress 47 . It is therefore possible that by administering large doses of NAC and glutathione, along with zinc, Vitamin C and Nrf2 activators, we lowered oxidative stress and inflammatory cytokine production, resulting in a rapid improvement in dyspnea and clinical symptomatology. A limitation of our study, apart from the small sample size however, is that we were unable to do laboratory testing in our patients, including checking oxidative stress markers (lipid peroxides) as well as inflammatory markers (CRP, ferritin, D-dimer) and LDH which might demonstrate a change post GSH administration 76 77 78 . A randomized, controlled trial of GSH, glutathione precursors with inflammatory/oxidative stress markers should be done in the future to fully elucidate the effects of blocking NF-kappaB, and to determine the effect of GSH and antioxidants on the clinical course of COVID-19 pneumonia and ARDS. Activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) has been shown to be required for transcription of the genes for many of the pro-inflammatory mediators associated with ARDS. An intact inflammatory response, in which NF-ъB plays a major role, is also required for appropriate host defense against viruses 79 and in the later stages of bacterial pneumonia 80 . In preclinical models of sepsis and acute lung injury, associated with rapid and large increases in pro-inflammatory cytokines and other mediators, suppression of NF-ъB activation has been shown to result in improved survival 81 82 . NAC, alpha-lipoic acid and GSH all inhibit TNF-alpha-induced NF-kappaB activation. Oral and IV glutathione as well as glutathione precursors (N-acetyl-cysteine, alpha-lipoic acid) may, therefore, represent a novel treatment approach for blocking NFKappaB and addressing "cytokine storm syndrome" and respiratory distress in patients suffering with COVID 19 pneumonia. Zinc, vitamin C and NRF 2 activators may also be helpful in decreasing the inflammatory response and lowering cytokine production. Randomized controlled trials should be performed to evaluate the efficacy of these novel therapies in the treatment of patients with COVID-19 pneumonia and ARDS. The views expressed are those of Dr Richard Horowitz, and do not represent the views of the Tick-Borne Disease Working Group, HHS, or the United States. 