Acquired Nonneoplastic Neonatal and Pediatric Diseases
J Stocker, Aliya Husain, Louis Dehner
empty
The lung biopsy is an established procedure to procure a pathologic diagnosis in a child with a suspected pneumonic process of undetermined etiology. Improvements in pediatric anesthesia and surgery have reduced the operative complications to a minimum. A biopsy can usually be taken through a small intercostal incision when localization is not especially important in a patient with diffuse changes (see Chapter 1) . The alternative method for tissue sampling is the endoscopic trans bronchial biopsy. There is less risk to the patient, but the specimen is smaller and crush artifacts from the instrument are more common. Rapid tissue processing of the biopsy for routine histologic preparation is preferred to a frozen-section consultation because these specimens in children are often very small and may be exhausted in the preparation. If the clinician is mainly interested in knowing whether granulomas or recurrent tumor is present, however, a frozen section can serve that immediate purpose. Another function of the frozen section is to give the surgeon some indication whether lesional tissue has been sampled. A number of series have been published and should be consulted about the results of open lung and transbronchial biopsies in children. 1 Another diagnostic procedure is the fine-needle aspiration biopsy,2 in which the needle is guided by computed tomography (CT) or ultrasonography. The application of fine-needle aspiration biopsy is mainly confined to the presence of a discrete mass with the clinical prospects of recurrent or metastatic tumor. A diagnosis by this biopsy technique has medical and economic advantages. If the changes in the lunges) are diffuse in nature, rather than a single localized lesion, the positive yield in our experience has been quite low. Some of the disease entities presented in this chapter are also discussed elsewhere in this volume for adult patients, and the reader is referred to those chapters. Many other entities discussed here, however, do not pertain to adults. 176  It is important to understand the difference between hyaline membrane disease (HMD) and the formation of hyaline membranes (HMs). The term hyaline membrane disease is used almost exclusively to describe the neonatal respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) associated with prematurity, which is due to the immature lungs' failure to synthesize adequate amounts of surfactant. 3 The risk of developing HMD is increased in males, infants of diabetic mothers, patients with preeclampsia,4 and after cesarean section. In contrast, the formation of HM is associated with many other primary diseases such as infection (congenital or acquired), meconium aspiration, hemorrhage, and shock. Hyaline membrane disease in the classic form, as described by Lauweryns S in 1970, has been largely prevented by inhaled surfactant therapy on the first day of life, which has become the standard of care since the early 1990s. Today, HMD is seen as the cause of death, at autopsy, only infrequently, usually in the extremely premature infant (23 to 25 weeks' gestation) who dies in the first day or two of life. Infants who survive severe RDS for longer than 3 or 4 days before death usually display the changes of bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) described below. Formation of hyaline membranes can also be seen in postmature infants. Seo and colleagues 6 described their occurrence in 17 of 21 postterm infants dying within 10 days of birth. Amniotic and meconium aspiration was present in 95% of these cases. Clinically, RDS is characterized by tachypnea, intercostal retractions, and hypoxemia. Radiographically, there is a typical ground-glass appearance of the lungs with air bronchograms and diffusely scattered reticulogranular opacities. On gross examination the lungs are firm, atelectatic, and typically sink when placed in water. The pleura is smooth and deep tan to red. The cut surface reveals a deep red parenchyma that oozes bloody fluid and resembles liver more than lung. Microscopically there is a diffuse atelectasis that accentuates the bronchi and dilated bronchioles and alveolar ducts ( Fig. 7.1) . Smooth, homogeneous pink membranes, the HMs from which the disease derives its name lie free in the lumen or are closely applied to surfaces of respiratory bronchioles and alveolar ducts ( Fig. 7 .2). The membranes are composed of necrotic alveolar lining cells, plasma transudate, inhaled amniotic fluid, and, if hemorrhage is present, fibrin. Homogeneously pink or finely granular transudate is often present in alveolar saccules, occasionally extending to bronchiolar and bronchial levels. Hemorrhagic material may be present focally throughout the lung. Pulmonary lymphatics are dilated particularly around pulmonary veins. 7 Hyaline membranes may be seen in infants dying as early as 1 to 4 hours after birth. Well-formed membranes are usually present by 12 to 24 hours, and by 36 to 48 hours, in cases of uncomplicated disease, organization of these membranes occurs with separation of the membrane from the underlying wall and engulfment of the material by macrophages (Fig. 7.3 ). Final repair of the bronchiolar and alveolar duct wall is accomplished by resurfacing of the wall by bronchiolar epithelial cells or type I and II alveolar lining cells. 8 ,9 In the majority of FIGURE 7.2. Hyaline membrane disease. In this I-day-old infant's lung, homogeneous membranes cover the surface of the alveolar duct. FIGURE 7.3 . Hyaline membrane disease in 4-day-old infant. Hyaline membranes are undergoing organization by macrophages and regenerating alveolar lining cells, which separate membranes from the wall of the alveolar duct. Note "roundedup" membrane material. patients, the HMs resolve completely, resulting in a normal or near-normal functioning lung. Up to 30% of patients of less than 1000-g birth weight develop BPD. The appearance of the hyaline membranes may be altered by the presence of bacteria that find the membranes an ideal culture medium. Gram stains of membranes that are fragmented, granular, and faintly basophilic often display the gram-positive cocci or gramnegative rods typical of streptococcal or Escherichia coli infections occasionally associated with this disease (Fig. 7.4) . In infants with kernicterus, intraventricular hemorrhage, intrahepatic bile stasis, pulmonary hemorrhage, or disseminated intravascular coagulation who survive 3 days or longer, yellow HMs may be present. The yellow pigment, visible in unstained paraffin sections, is an unconjugated bilirubin. lo . , ! Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia Both the definition and pathology of BPD have evolved since the initial description by Northway et alY and Nash et alY in separate articles in 1967. Antenatal glucocorticoid therapy, postnatal surfactant therapy, and improved mechanical ventilation have minimized severe lung injury in all but the smallest of premature babies. Thus, BPD is now infrequent in treated infants with gestational age exceeding 30 weeks or birth weight more than 1200 g. However, when one looks at those areas of the world where such treatment is not available or possible, the classic form of BPD is still seen. Clinically, a more extensive definition was proposed at the 2000 National Institutes of Health (NIH) BPD workshop, which uses oxygen dependency at 36 weeks post-J.T. Stocker et al. menstrual age, total duration of oxygen supplementation, positive pressure requirements, and gestational age of the infant to delineate the three degrees of severity: mild, moderate, and severe. I4 A subsequent study evaluated this new definition and concluded that it does offer a better description of underlying pulmonary disease and correlates with the infant's maturity, growth, and overall severity of disease. IS The incidence of BPD is dependent on multiple factors, the most important of which are gestational age, weight, and the definition used. Using the above definition, one retrospective study of very low birth weight (VLBW) infants looked at the mortality and incidence and severity of BPD in three groups of patients over time. Cohort A was from 1986 to 1990 (pre-surfactant era and use of conventional intermittent mandatory ventilation [IMV]); cohort B was from 1993 to 1994 (use of synthetic surfactant, nasopharyngeal continuous positive airway pressure [CPAP] and conventional IMV); and cohort C was from 2000 to 2001 (use of natural surfactant, early nasal prong CPAP, synchronized IMV with tidal volume monitoring, and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation. Bronchopulmonary dysplasia was classified as mild, moderate, or severe. The mean gestational ages and birth weights were 28 and 3/7 weeks and 1120 g for cohort A, 30 and 0/7 weeks and 1340 g for cohort B, and 29 and 1/7 weeks and 1200 g for cohort C. The use of partial or complete courses of antenatal corticosteroids increased over time. There was a 50% reduction of mortality between each time period with mortality rates of 30%, 14%, and 7%, while the overall incidence of BPD was 26%, 11 %, and 19% in cohorts A, B, and C. Of note, moderate and severe forms of BPD decreased over time (11 %,3% , and 2%, respectively). Thus, changes in neonatal care of VLBW infants have resulted in dramatically improved survival rates over the past 15 years without increasing moderate to severe pulmonary morbidity.! 6 The pathogenesis of bronchopulmonary dysplasia is generally considered to be multifactorial. 17 The disease was first described in premature infants with severe respiratory distress syndrome who had been treated with high levels of oxygen (80% to 100%) and intermittent positive-pressure respirators for longer than 6 days. 12.13.18 Subsequent experimental studies have clearly demonstrated the toxic effects of prolonged exposure to high oxygen levels on the lungs of animals. 19 -23 Considered of equal importance by many is the role of barotrauma from artificial ventilation to the developing immature lung, contributing not only to the interstitial emphysema, pneumothorax, and pneumomediastinum seen in infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia but also directly injuring the acinus. 24 • 25 While most cases follow the treatment of the RDS, others may occur following pneumonia, meconium aspiration syndrome, tracheoesophageal fistula, and congenital heart diseaseY The initiation of mechanical ventilation in surfactanttreated pre term animals causes a proinflammatory response, suggesting that any mechanical ventilation of the preterm lung may be injurious. 26 Inflammation appears to be central to the development of BPD. 14 Multiple proinflammatory and chemotactic factors are present in the air spaces of ventilated preterm infants, and these factors are found in higher concentrations in the air spaces of infants who subsequently develop BPDY Factors such as macrophage inflammatory protein-1 and interleukin (IL)-8 persist in the air spaces, and counterregulatory cytokines such as IL-10 may be decreased, resulting in unregulated and persistent inflammation. Infants exposed to antenatal infection/inflammation or fetal colonization with Ureaplasma urealyticum have proinflammatory indicators in their air spaces at delivery?8 The activation of inflammatory cascades can result in a vicious cycle of inflammation, which resolves slowly. Microbial infections (group B streptococcus, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and Escherichia coli) activate nuclear factor KB (NF-KB), induce proinflammatory cytokine production, stimulate inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression, and increase vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression and other inflammatory mediators in the host. 29 All these factors interact with each other. Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) can activate iNOS expression, promote ICAM-1 production, induce apoptosis, and upregulate NF-KB activation. After initial damage reparative processes begin that favor fibroproliferative changes in the lung. Several profibrotic factors such as transforming growth factor-~ (TGF-~), nitric oxide (NO), and VEGF have been shown to play roles in the development of chronic lung disease. This results in remodeling of lung tissue with disrupted lung morphology and architecture including interference with vascular and alveolar development. Close coordination of growth between airways and vessels is essential for normal lung development. Thus it has been hypothesized that failure of pulmonary vascular growth during a critical period of lung growth (saccular or alveolar stages of development) could decrease septation and ultimately contribute to the lung hypoplasia that characterizes BPD. 30 Stachurski et al. 31 conducted a comparative analysis of the pulmonary vasculature in infants with BPD and age-matched controls using immunohistochemical, molecular, and bias-free stereologic volumetric techniques. They concluded that the total pulmonary volume of endothelial cells, reflecting the size of the peripheral microvasculature network, of BPD lungs parallels or exceeds that of age-matched controls. They speculated that the primary pathogenic factor in BPD is ventilation-induced type II pneumocyte cell death, rather than microvascular dysgenesis. Because decreased numbers of alveoli are so striking in the lungs of very pre term infants who die of BPD, understanding the developmental regulation of septation and alveolarization is a high priority in understanding the pathology of BPD. In experimental models, hyperoxia, hypoxia, or poor nutrition can decrease septation, as can glucocorticoid treatment. 32 In transgenic mice, overexpression of the cytokines TNF-a, TGF-~, IL-6, or IL-ll also can interfere with alveolarization, suggesting that the proinflammatory environment of the air space of the pre term infant may contribute to the altered septation. 33 Other factors involved in the development of bronchopulmonary dysplasia include pulmonary edema 34 and vitamin A deficiency. 35 The treatment of infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia is primarily supportive, since once it develops, it cannot be reversed. Thus there is intense focus on developing preventive measures. The evolution of BPD from a disorder of pulmonary injury affecting moderately preterm infants to one characterized by a developmental pulmonary arrest among survivors of extreme prematurity has important implications for BPD prevention. Recent recognition that the pathogenesis of BPD might have prenatal origins raises new challenges and opportunities for studies of BPD prevention; however, most current preventative strategies for BPD focus on respiratory management. Neither past nor current clinical trials have shown a conclusive benefit of a single preventive treatment strategy. Promising but still largely unproven preventative respiratory treatments include high frequency oscillatory ventilation, permissive hypercapnia, and inhaled NO. Other areas to be studied are postnatal low-dose corticosteroid treatment, superoxide dismutase, inositol, and aI-proteinase inhibitor. Only vitamin A has proven a safe and effective preventive treatment for BPD. Directed cytokine and genetic therapies are on the horizon. 36 Survival of infants who develop severe bronchopulmonary dysplasia is associated with a 54% mortality and significant morbidity even in long-term survivors. Predictors of survival and outcome, not surprisingly, include degree of prematurity, duration of oxygen requirement, length of stay in the hospital, and severity of radiographic abnormalities. 37 The pathology of the lungs of infants with BPD has to be considered in the context of how the patient was treated. The classic changes of BPD are still seen in those not treated with surfactant and newer forms of ventilation (pre-surfactant BPD), whereas the treated patients who still develop severe enough BPD that results in death have an arrest in lung development. These two forms of BPD will be described separately. The pathology of pre-surfactant bronchopulmonary dysplasia 38 ,39 varies considerably depending on (1) the gestational age of the infant, specifically, the degree of immaturity of the lung; (2) the type, duration, and peak (5) the presence of intercurrent processes such as pneumonia, interstitial emphysema, or pneumothorax. Detailed description of all these variations is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the major changes in gross morphology and changes within the airways and acini are described and summarized (Table  7 .1). These changes are divided into (1) acute, (2) reparative or healing, and (3) long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia. In the acute stages of the disease, following typical changes of hyaline membrane disease in the first 3 to 4 days of life, the lungs are bulky, firm, and heavy, and often two to four times the expected weight ( Fig. 7 .5). The pink-to-tan pleura may be smooth or mildly irregular with areas of depressed or atelectatic parenchyma producing an uneven surface. Cut section displays a solid-appearing parenchyma that exudes fluid when compressed. By 1 to 2 weeks, the lungs begin to show a typical cobblestone surface with the development of an intricate sublobulation beneath the pleura representing alternating areas of atelectasis, interstitial fibroplasia, or hyperexpansion of acini ( Fig. 7.6 ). As the disease progresses to the healed stage at 1 to 3 months, this sublobulation becomes more accentuated with shallow and deep depressions dividing the lung into irregular lobules ( Fig.  7.7) . Some of these depressions may be large enough to be confused with the fissures between lobes of the lung. Hyperexpanded acini protrude from the surface of the lung with individual alveoli visible to the naked eye, implying an overexpansion of at least 5-to la-fold. Microscopically, the airways (trachea, bronchi, bronchioles) and gas-exchanging portions of the lung (alveolar ducts, saccules, and alveoli) undergo a series of acute changes followed by reparative processes that eventually lead to a static stage termed long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia. 39 These changes will be considered in turn at each level of the lung ( Fig. 7.8) . The acute changes within the trachea range from mild mucosal dysplasia to frank necrosis. 4 0, 41 The earliest changes may consist only of loss of cilia and disruption of the pseudostratification typical of respiratory epithelium ( Fig. 7.9 ). Epithelial cells may appear dysplastic with enlarged nuclei. Focal mucosal necrosis, which may extend through the submucosa to the level of the tracheal cartilage rings, may occur and is possibly related to excessive pressure from an endotracheal tube. Acute and chronic inflammation in the submucosal connective tissue is usually present in varying degrees, and submucosal glands may be hypertrophied with dilated acini and ducts. In the reparative stages, the mucosa may undergo significant metaplastic changes eventually resembling noncornified stratified squamous epithelium, which is usually focal and noted predominantly in the lower trachea but may line the entire trachea extending into the ducts of the submucosal glands (Fig. 7.10 ). Chronic inflammation persists in the submucosa, and glands may display hyperplasia producing a Reid index of 40% to 60% that may persist into the healed stage. Focal fibrous and muscular hyperplasia in the lower trachea may produce epithelialcovered polyps that may narrow or rarely occlude the lumen. Bronchial changes in the acute, reparative, and healed stages are similar to those noted in the trachea (Fig. 7.11 ). First-or second-division bronchi display mucosal dysplasia and occasionally necrosis. The submucosa is often edematous and mildly infiltrated by acute inflammatory cells. Submucosal glands may be hypertrophied in early stages, but hyperplasia infrequently occurs and is usually mild or nonexistent in the healed phase. Muscular hyperplasia may develop in the reparative stage and persist in distal bronchi in the healed phase. The most striking changes of acute BPD occur at the level of the bronchioles and alveolar ducts, where several distinct lesions are observed. Total occlusion of a terminal or respiratory bronchiole by HMs or necrotic debris (Figs. 7.12,7.13, and 7.14) may effectively remove access to, and thus protect, the acinus distal to the occlusion from exposure to oxygen tensions and ventilatory pressures. The occluded bronchiole may display an intact epithelial lining, submucosa, and muscular wall, or the bronchiole may be recognizable only by remnants of the muscular wall with partial or total destruction of the epithelium. As the lesions resolve, most of the occluded bronchioles are cleared of debris or recanalized. The epithelium may regenerate, leaving a normal-appearing, cuboidal to columnar epithelium and unremarkable wall. Some of the severely involved bronchioles may remain permanently obliterated. Bronchioles in the acute stage that remain free of HMs and necrotic debris, or are only partially occluded, may display striking epithelial cell dysplasia with large irregular cells containing hyperchromatic nuclei with densely clumped chromatin and prominent nucleoli ( Fig. 7.15 ). Focal necrosis may also be present. The submucosa is usually edematous and may be infiltrated by neutrophils and lymphocytes. As the lesion progresses, fibroblasts FIGURE 7.11. Pre-surfactant era long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia at 6 months. Lumen of a large mainstem bronchus is significantly narrowed by a polyp with a fibromuscular core. In slightly more mature lung (820-g infant) than in Figure 7 .12, protective effect of occluded bronchiole is readily seen in absence of acinar dysplasia or fibroplasia. Figure 7 .14, and at the same magnification, a diffuse and uniform injury to the parenchyma is present. Note the scattered "open" bronchioles throughout the section. B. At a higher magnification, an open bronchiole (upper center) is surrounded by alveolar septa that are markedly widened and dysplastic all the way to the edge of the acinus (compare with Fig. 7.14B ). C. This alveolar duct is compressed by the extensive fibroplasia surrounding it and extending into the alveolar septa (compare with Fig.7 .14C). IT. Stocker et al. may proliferate within the submucosal connective tissue (intrinsic fibroplasia) or outside the muscular wall (extrinsic fibroplasia). With resolution of these injured bronchioles, the epithelium also returns to normal, but muscular hyperplasia of the wall may persist. The alveolar ducts not protected by an occluded bronchiole in the acute phase display striking epithelial cell dysplasia (for which the disease is named) and focal necrosis. Edema in the subepithelial region gives way to prominent fibroplasia, which may extend into adjacent alveolar septa. This fibroproliferative process and associated edema may expand the duct wall, leading to varying degrees of occlusion of the lumen and partially protecting the distal acinus in a manner similar to that provided by occluded bronchioles. With resolution, the ductular wall becomes thickened by fibrous connective tissue. Alveoli in acini with occluded bronchioles remain unremarkable ( Fig. 7 .14). In acini exposed to the high oxygen tensions and ventilatory pressures, however, alveoli have increased numbers of macrophages with hyperplastic and bizarre nuclei ( Fig. 7.15 ). Alveolar lining cells may undergo necrosis or, more often, become hyperplastic, frequently forming a prominent cuboidal cell lining to the alveoli all the way to the periphery of the acinus. In cases with more severe injury, interstitial edema is present along with plump fibroblasts that may proliferate and, in extreme cases, virtually replace an acinus. Resolution of this process, depending on the degree of injury, may lead to interstitial fibrosis ( Fig. 7 .16) or possibly total loss of the acinus. The degree of acinar injury seems to correlate with the long-term survival of premature infants with bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Soboyna and colleagues 38 and Margraf and colleagues 42 noted a marked decrease in mean total alveolar number (less than 15% of expected) and internal surface area of the lung in long-term survivors. Interstitial fibrosis, the hallmark of long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia ( Fig. 7 .17), is usually uniform within an acinus but may be extremely variable from one lobe of a lung to another or even from one acinus to another (Fig. 7 .18)?9 The fibrous connective tissue within the alveolar wall separates the usually intermeshed capillary beds supplying the alveoli on either side of the wall. In cases with severe fibrosis, a third capillary bed may be present within the connective tissue separating the two alveolar capillary beds. Changes in the vessels within the lung, other than those in the alveolar capillary bed, are mild. Pulmonary arteries at the level of the bronchi display adventitial edema early in the course of the disease, and medial hypertrophy is present during the reparative and healed stages, although changes beyond Heath and Edward grade I to II pulmonary hypertensive vascular disease are unusual. 43 Bronchial arteries and lymphatics show no significant changes. Changes within the interlobular septa and pleura are seen only in cases in which acute or persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema develops. Hyperexpansion of acini may be present following the early stages of the disease, accounting for the cystic changes noted radiographically and the accentuated sublobulation seen grossly. The enlarged alveoli are usually in acini with little or, more frequently, no interstitial fibrosis. Alveoli may be expanded to 5-to 10-fold or more normal size, and rupture of the highly elastic walls may be noted. As with the interstitial fibrosis, the emphysema may be patchy with an acinus containing normal-sized alveoli lying adjacent to one with markedly distended alveoli. The sequential changes of bronchopulmonary dysplasia are presented schematically in Figure 7 .19. The pathology of post-surfactant BPD is significantly different from the above description. Necrotizing bronchiolitis and severe alveolar septal fibrosis are infrequently seen. 44 The few infants who now die from BPD display what might be best described as acinar simplification ( Fig. 7.20) . These simplified acini are characterized by uniformly dilated alveoli whose walls consist of thin 185 FIGURE 7.17 . Pre-surfactant era long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia at 6 months. Acinus below displays diffuse alveolar septal fibrosis, while acinus at top, although hyperexpanded, shows little or no fibrosis (compare with Fig. 7 .16). FIGURE 7.18. Pre-surfactant era long-standing healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia at 6 months. The distinct injury and fibrosis to the septa of an exposed acinus (left), the hallmark of longstanding healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia, is apparent when compared to an acinus (right) that had been protected by an occluded bronchiole and shows no alveolar septal fibrosis. A c A c FIGURE 7.19. Pre-surfactant era bronchopulmonary dysplasia. A. Three normal acini (A, B, C) arise from terminal bronchiole in this schematic drawing. B. In acute stages of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, bronchiole leading to acinus A is occluded by material (hyaline membranes, necrotic debris, etc.), protecting acinus from ventilatory pressure and high oxygen tension. Bronchiole to acinus B is only partially occluded, allowing some injury to alveolar saccules and alveoli. Acinus C receives full ventilatory pressure and oxygen tension through widely patent alveolar septa with little or no interstitial fibrosis ( Fig.  7 .21). The bronchioles are similarly unremarkable, with only an occasional mild increase in peri bronchiolar musculature. These changes seem to represent an "arrest" of development of the acini, with a resulting markedly decreased number of alveoli within each acinus. As a result, the surface area of the lung is significantly decreased even in the absence of significant fibrosis or bronchiolitis. A c B bronchiole, allowing extensive damage (dysplasia, inflammation, fibroplasia) to alveolar saccules and alveoli. C. With resolution and healing, bronchiole in A is reopened allowing expansion (or overexpansion) of uninjured acinus. Acinus B displays interstitial fibrosis atypical of healed bronchopulmonary dysplasia; the most severely injured acinus C may partially or completely disappear, leading to contraction and fissuring of pleura. (From Husain et a1. 45 Copyright 1998, with permission from Elsevier.) Husain et a1. 45 A B c was infrequently seen in surfactant-treated BPD patients even though their disease was severe enough to be the underlying cause of their death. The RAC/MLI ratio (an indicator of the number of alveoli) in the BPD patients who lived weeks to months was virtually unchanged from that expected at the infants' birth. In other words, an infant born at 28 weeks' gestation who developed HMD and BPD and lived for 12 weeks, whether treated with surfactant or not, had the same number of alveoli as one born at 28 weeks' gestation and died immediately after birth. Although high concentrations of oxygen over prolonged periods of time are known to cause alveolar cell hyperplasia and necrotizing bronchiolitis with resulting alveolar septal fibrosis, it is possible that low levels of oxygen (25% to 35%) in very immature infants may inhibit growth of new alveolar ducts and alveoli. Although the lung appears to mature histologically (alveolar septa thin and expand to resemble the septa of term infants) there is no accompanying significant increase in the surface area of the lung through increase in number of alveoli ( mechanical ventilation have limited the amount of injury to the bronchiole (i.e., no necrotizing bronchiolitis), the continued patency of all bronchioles throughout the course of therapy allows equal injury to all acini from even low levels of oxygen therapy, which should be compared with the even lower in utero oxygen levels to which the developing lung is exposed to. Complications of BPD include cor pulmonale, sudden unexpected death, higher incidence of cardiac arrhythmias, and a markedly increased susceptibility to pulmonary infections (both viral and bacterial). Interstitial pulmonary emphysema is the presence of air within the connective tissue, and possibly the lymphatics, of the perivascular and interlobular septa of the lungs. 46 Interstitial pulmonary emphysema develops along the interlobular septa of the lungs following the overdistention and rupture of the alveolar base, the segment of an alveolus directly contiguous to the fluid-rich tissue surrounding blood vessels. This allows air to leak into the septal connective tissue. 47 The air may remain localized to the septa, or dissect centrally along vessels to the mediastinum producing pneumomediastinum, or to the pericardium producing pneumopericardium, or peripherally to and through the pleura producing a pneumothorax. 48 Interstitial pulmonary emphysema had once been seen in as many as 20% of all preterm infants ventilated for the respiratory distress syndrome. But it has also been observed in low birth weight infants who breathed spontaneously and did not need mechanical ventilation 49 -51 or required only limited assistance such as nasal prong oxygen supplementation. 52 Interstitial pulmonary emphysema has also been noted following Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia,53 and, in a 15-year-old boy in association with a pulmonary metastasis from a synovial sarcoma. 54 Prior to the advent of surfactant therapy, infants weighing less than 1500 g showed an incidence of nearly 33 %, and infants weighing less than 1000 g showed an incidence as high as 42%? Mortality in these infants was higher (greater than 50%), again primarily (95%) in those infants with birth weights less than 1500 g (64 %) or who develop interstitial pulmonary emphysema on the first day of life (>75%). Since the advent of surfactant therapy and the use of high-frequency oscillatory ventilation, the incidence of interstitial pulmonary emphysema in premature infants has fallen dramatically,56--58 with one study noting an incidence of 6% in a group of 18 premature infants (median birth weight of 1010 g) vs. 39% in a control group of nonsurfactant, continuous positive airway pressure treated infants. 59 Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, and pneumopericardium frequently accompany interstitial pulmonary emphysema (40% to 77%) and contribute significantly to the mortality of preterm infants.6o Pneumothorax and interstitial pulmonary emphysema are also seen in fullterm infants, primarily in association with meconium aspiration 61 or pulmonary hypoplasia. Radiographically, interstitial pulmonary emphysema presents as lucent linear streaks with prominent interstitial markings and cystic spaces that tend to radiate from the hilum. 62 Large subpleural lucent cystic spaces may be seen, being particularly noticeable if a pneumothorax is present. If interstitial pulmonary emphysema persists, radiographs may display an expanded multicystic pattern of one or more lobes. If it is localized to one lung, mediastinal shift and depression of the diaphragm may occur. Compression atelectasis of lung adjacent to the cysts will further accentuate the air-filled spaces. 63 Solitary unilocular cysts of the lung may be seen with persistence of acute interstitial pulmonary emphysema even if the initial episode of interstitial emphysema is undetected for days or weeks. 64 The treatment of infants with bilateral interstitial pulmonary emphysema is difficult and varied. Reduction in ventilatory pressures is effective and alleviates the influx of air into interstitial tissues but may also prove inadequate to ventilate the infant. High-frequency ventilation has been shown to be helpful in these infants. Many modes of therapy have been employed in the treatment of infants with persistent unilateral interstitial pulmonary emphysema, including selective bronchial intubation, lateral decubitus positioning, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, alveolar lavage during flexible bronchoscopy, artificial pneumothorax and pneumonotomy,partial liquid ventilation,65 and lobectomy.46 Persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema in recent years has become 189 an indication for pulmonary resection in the newborn period. 62 Interstitial pulmonary emphysema pathologically occurs in two forms (Table 7. 2): an acute usually diffuse form noted in the first few days of life, and a persistent form seen in either a localized or diffuse pattern in infants more than 1 week old. 46 • 66 Acute interstitial pulmonary emphysema (AIPE) appears grossly as round-to-oval gas-filled spaces around bronchovascular bundles or along interlobular septa ( Fig.  7 .23). These spaces are usually visible beneath the pleura but are almost always limited to those areas in which the interlobular septa extend to the pleura. This is a major reason for establishing that the gas, for the most part, is within the connective tissue of the interlobular spaces rather than within lymphatics, which could lead to a lateral distribution of air within subpleurallymphatics. 46 The parenchyma adjacent to the interstitial pulmonary emphysema is often atelectatic and firmer than areas of uninvolved lung. Microscopically, interstitial pulmonary emphysema is characterized by spherical cysts within the interlobular septa ( Fig. 7 .24). The walls of the cysts are composed of thin fragments of connective tissue or, more frequently, the walls of collapsed alveoli of lobules adjacent to the interlobular septa. The cysts usually have no discernible lining, although rarely endothelial cells of interlobular septal lymphatics may be incorporated into some of the cysts. Other lymphatics, however, along with pulmonary veins, may be compressed by the interstitial cysts. Subpleural lymphatics, as previously mentioned, are rarely involved by this process. Adjacent parenchyma may display the changes of the HMD and BPD so frequently associated with interstitial pulmonary emphysema. Persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema (PIPE) is now seen most frequently in its localized form presenting  Acute interstitial pulmonary emphysema. Air-filled cysts are present within interlobular septa extending radially from the hilum (B, right) to the subpleura. grossly with a picture of multiple intercommunicating cysts 0.2 to 2.0 em in diameter, resembling, in some cases, congenital pulmonary airway malformation. 46 The cysts, again limited to interlobular septa, are often irregular and appear to be lined by a smooth membrane overlying atelectatic parenchyma ( Fig. 7.25) . Microscopically, the cysts display a thin to occasionally prominent fibrous connective tissue wall studded with multinucleated foreign-FIGURE 7.25. Persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema. A cross section of lung displays many distorted interconnecting irregular air-filled cysts varying from 0.2 cm to more than 1 cm in diameter. body giant cells (Fig. 7.26 ). These giant cells, the hallmark of persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema,46 may occur singly or in clusters along the surface of the cyst or within the connective tissue of the cyst wall, the latter probably reflecting an area of collapsed and scarred former cyst. S ! The cells are 20 to 150 )lm or more in diameter with two to 35 or more round-to-oval eccentrically placed nuclei, each with a prominent nucleolus. The abundant cytoplasm is smooth to finely granular or vesicular and only rarely contains any identifiable or stainable material, as with hemosiderin. The tissue in the walls of the cysts ranges from plump fibroblasts with prominent capillaries in young infants to dense collagenized connective tissue in older infants. Foci of hemosiderin-laden macrophages, probably reflecting old hemorrhage, and chronic inflammatory cells may also be present. Rarely, a direct communication between the interstitial cysts and a bronchiole or alveolar duct may be demonstrated with cuboidal epithelial lining cells extending from the bronchiole into the cYSt. 47 Adjacent lung parenchyma may be entirely normal or display focal atelectasis, fibrosis, or pneumonia. Persistent interstitial pulmonary emphysema is still occasionally seen in its diffuse form with three or more lobes involved and in close association with chronic lung disease of the premature infant (bronchopulmonary dysplasia). The lung is firm, reflecting the underlying alveolar septal fibrosis of BPD but in addition, small (0.1 to 0.4 cm in diameter), irregular gas-filled spaces are present as long thin channels around bronchovascular bundles and along interlobular septa. The channel walls are composed of loose fibrous connective tissue along which giant cells are seen. They occur, however, far less frequently than in the localized form of PIPE. The underlying pulmonary parenchyma usually displays the characteristic features of BPD. The cyst walls of PIPE, particularly in the localized form, are virtually identical to those seen in pneumatosis intestinalis and pneumatosis vaginalis. 46 The giant cells apparently reflect a reaction of the connective tissue to air, a foreign substance, which when present in the tissue for more than 7 days elicits this response. 67 While lymphatics may be incorporated into the walls of the interstitial cysts through fibrosis or contribute to the lining of a small portion of the cysts, it is unlikely that the cysts represent only intralymphatic air. As previously mentioned, interstitial air is rarely seen in the subpleural region except for the area in direct continuity with the interlobular septum. In cases of bronchopulmonary dysplasia with AIPE or PIPE, the large subpleural lymphatic bed is uninvolved and in most cases appears virtually normal. Also, the air-containing cysts of interstitial pulmonary emphysema are many times the size of normal lymphatics and the dilated lymphatics of congenitallymphangiectasis, which, incidentally, does involve subpleural as well as interlobular lymphatics. Finally, an endothelial lining, as present in lymphatics, cannot be identified with any consistency in the interstitial cystS. 46 Tracheomalacia While congenital tracheomalacia is a relatively rare disorder (see Chapter 6), acquired tracheomalacia has been seen in premature infants requiring prolonged nasotracheal intubation as part of the treatment for the RDS. 68 ,69 Damage to the lower trachea and mainstem bronchi has also been noted with aggressive airway suctioning through naso-or orotracheal tubes. 70 Tracheal perforation, in fact, may occur as a complication of vigorous nasotracheal intubation. 71 Damage to the trachea with resultant tracheomalacia has been reported in children treated for recurrent laryngotracheal papillomatosis. 72 Tracheomalacia and gastroesophageal reflux presenting as cough in neonates has also been noted. 73 Surgical repair with resection of the involved area, aortopericardiosternopexy, use of an extratracheal splint, or insertion of a stent has been done in treatment. 7 4-79 Radiographically, tracheomalacia may be noted as an extremely mobile trachea that is more dilated and oval (or even collapsed) than normaUO,80 Grossly the trachea is pliable and easily compressed and flattened. The internal diameter of the lumen may be enlarged, with an increased width of the posterior fibromuscular membrane completing the cartilage ring. Microscopically, squamous metaplasia of the epithelium is usually prominent, either focally or around the entire internal diameter of the trachea. Focal ulceration and necrosis may also be present. 68 The underlying fibromuscular connective tissue may display an acute or chronic inflammatory infiltrate, and mucous glands may be increased, occupying more than 50% of the area between the cartilage rings and epithelium. The cartilage rings (and plates in the bronchi) may be narrowed or thinned, with rare foci of inflammation and necrosis, but in most cases they are histologically unremarkable. The development of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) and its use in the often successful treatment of meconium aspiration,8! congenital heart malformations, and diaphragmatic hernia (among other causes of pulmonary hypoplasia) have produced a unique set of pathologic changes in the lung. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation is not, unfortunately, successful in a variety of the pulmonary dysplasia disorders such as alveolar capillary dysplasia, surfactant protein Band C IT. Stocker et al. deficiency, and pulmonary lymphangiectasia. 82 Chou and colleagues 83 described the autopsy finding in 23 patients receiving ECMO therapy and noted the presence of interstitial and intraalveolar hemorrhage with HM formation during the first few days of therapy. Hyperplasia of type II alveolar cells and bronchial epithelial cells was noted after 2 days of ECMO therapy in some patients and by 7 days in all patients. Bronchial epithelium displayed squamous metaplasia in most cases. Clusters of calcified material were noted in the alveoli of 7 of 23 cases. Interstitial fibrosis was a consistent finding after 7 days of ECMO therapy. In three patients treated for 15, 19, and 21 days, there was replacement of the terminal airways and alveoli by tall columnar and mucin-producing epithelium. 83 Pulmonary Hemorrhage Hemorrhage into the alveoli or interstitium of the lung is a rather common histologic finding at autopsy or in tissue removed at surgery for various reasons. In the latter situation, one must remember the possibility that intraoperative manipulation may have produced the hemorrhage. This section is concerned primarily with the clinicopathologic entities of massive pulmonary hemorrhage of the newborn and the so-called alveolar hemorrhage syndromes ( Fig. 7.27 ).84-86 In some cases these two disease categories may converge as pathogenetically identical processes 87 (Table 7. 3). The alveolar hemorrhage syndromes include Goodpasture syndrome, Wegener granulomatosis, the collagen vascular diseases complicated by hemorrhage, and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis. 88 The designation pulmonary renal syndromes has been applied as a collective appellation to this same basic group of diseases with the exception of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis. 89 In the pediatric age population, the concerns are mainly focused on neonatal pulmonary hemorrhage and idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis. If surfactant deficiency is the most common cause of neonatal respiratory distress, massive pulmonary hemorrhage is one of the least frequent. There is little to distinguish massive pulmonary hemorrhage from other etiologies of severe respiratory insufficiency in the early clinical stages until there is bleeding from the tracheobronchial tree. The changes on the chest radiograph are generally nonspecific. Herein lies the problem of massive pulmonary hemorrhage and whether there is such a specific entity. An unmistakable impression from recent studies is that massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a diagnosis of exclusion, because there are other conditions such as disseminated intravascular coagulation, pneumonia, and congestive heart failure that produce a clinic oradiologic picture of massive pulmonary hemorrhage. 193 The estimated frequency of massive pulmonary hemorrhage in neonates is 0.1 % of live births, a figure derived from the British Perinatal Mortality survey.90 This incidence increases dramatically to 5% to 7% in VLBW infants with respiratory distress. 85 As viewed from the perspective of an autopsy finding in neonates, the frequency of pulmonary hemorrhage is more difficult to assess since the quantitative aspects may not be explicitly addressed in each published study. Hanzlick,9! however, examined infant lung samples (four sections/cases) obtained by medical examiner pathologists from infants dying from forensic and nonforensic causes. The lung sections were scored as to the extent of alveolar hemorrhage on a scale of 0 to 7. In the cohort of 60 cases, 40 (67%) displayed some degree of pulmonary hemorrhage, although none of the deaths was attributed to the hemorrhage. A number of mechanisms or etiologies have been proposed including surfactant deficiency, aspiration of maternal blood (confirmed with the Kleihauer-Betke test),92 viral or bacterial infections, hypothermia, coagulopathy, hemolytic disease of the newborn, early HMD, oxygen toxicity, birth asphyxia, EeMO, pulmonary hypertension secondary to patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary cap illaritis, and congenital hyperammonemia.89.93-99 Yeung lOO examined 35 neonates who came to autopsy after cultureproven bacterial infections during life; massive pulmonary hemorrhage was found in the lungs in 19 cases. It may be fair to conclude that massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a tissue response to a variety of systemic and localized conditions. One suggestion is that massive pulmonary hemorrhage is a nonspecific terminal event, a viewpoint that is difficult to refute. The infants who develop massive pulmonary hemorrhage may be premature or low weight for dates; others are full term or weigh in excess of 2500 g at birth.lol This variability in the clinical profile of neonates with massive pulmonary hemorrhage is best explained by the differences in etiology and pathogenesis. Since most studies are drawn from autopsy experiences, the conclusion might be made that massive pulmonary hemorrhage is universally fatal. However, there are, more recently, reports of survivors who have been treated with high-frequency ventilation or activated recombinant factor VII. 85 . 97 As with many diseases in infancy, massive pulmonary hemorrhage might best be treated by preventing the situations that lead to the hemorrhage, for example, surfactant replacement in premature infants to prevent hypoxia and alveolar cell damage. 102.103 Hemorrhage producing consolidation of at least two lobes of the lung is a definition of massive pulmonary hemorrhage that was proposed by Esterly and Oppenheimer lO4 in their classic study. They emphasized the confluent nature of the hemorrhage, although focal areas of more normal-appearing parenchyma may be identi- that the blood was a plasma filtrate. Microscopically, the hemorrhage is typically found in the alveoli and interstitium; however, the alveolar extravasation is generally more apparent than the interstitial hemorrhage ( Fig.  7.28 ). Many alveoli, in addition to the blood, contain palely staining fluid that is the predominant finding in some fields. The interlobar septa are often widened as the result of hemorrhage and edema. It is often difficult to be certain whether the changes in the alveolar septa are congestion or actual extravasation. When an area of lung is collapsed, there are further problems in the interpretation of the microscopic findings. When the lungs are examined, it is important to evaluate them for the presence of other abnormalities that may be as important, if not more so, in explaining the cause of death. Focal bronchopneumonia, fibrin thrombi in arteriolar or capillary-sized vessels, and aspirated material should be carefully searched for in the sections. lOO. 106 Fibrin thrombi are an indication of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy; an examination of other organs such as the kidney, adrenal, and intestine often discloses the presence of thrombi as well. Hyaline membrane formation is found in a minority of cases. Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis (IPH) presents with symptoms including iron-deficiency anemia,107, hypoxemia (85 % ), dyspnea, and hemoptysis (65 % ).108 It occurs primarily in children 3 to 6 years of age, but can be seen in children as young as 4 to 6 months of age.109 Consanguinity and environmental factors may be involved in its development. 110 The incidence is equal in both sexes, and 15% to 20% of cases occur in adolescents and young adults. Less specific nonpulmonary symptoms include fever (in as many as 79% of cases), lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and splenomegaly. Radiographically, early stages are characterized by patchy or diffuse pulmonary infiltrates or massive confluent shadows that may rapidly clear (Fig. 7.29 ).108.111 In later stages of the disease there is a perihilar reticulation or a pattern of diffuse interstitial disease. The clinical triad of hemoptysis, iron deficiency anemia, and diffuse parenchymal infiltrates is strongly suggestive of IPH. l1O Hypochromic microcytic anemia is seen in virtually all cases of IPH, and eosinophilia is present in 12% to 15% of patients. llo . l12 Bone marrow examination shows reactive erythroid hyperplasia and depleted iron stores. Levels of serum iron are low, and total iron-binding capacity is increased. Most patients with IPH have normal renal function without circulating autoantibodies. Associations with celiac disease, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, cardiomyopathy, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies have also been reported.113-117 A considerable amount of debate has surrounded the possibility that the saprophytic fungus Stachybotrys chartarum may be an etiologic agent of pulmonary hemosiderosis. 118 -121 After a number of reports of outbreaks of IPH in Cleveland and Chicago, and the discovery of S. chartarum in the homes of many of the children (and in the bronchoalveolar lavage of one child I22 ), an association was suggested. 123 Subsequent reviews of the initial reports by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), however, found shortcomings in the conduct of the studies, and a new study is currently underway to identify cases with a narrow definition of the disease (evidence of blood in the airway, age ::;1 year, absence of medical disease related to pulmonary hemorrhage, and severe respiratory distress or respiratory failure ) 124 107 Focal areas of consolidation are common due to massive accumulations of hemosiderin-laden macrophages, which obliterate alveolar spaces and are associated with interstitial fibrosis (Fig. 7.30 ). Corrin and A. Lung biopsy shows collections of hemosiderin-laden macrophages in alveoli primarily beneath the pleura. Changes are not specific for IPH, but this diagnosis is strongly suspected in the presence of appropriate clinical and radiographic findings. B. Prussian blue stain for iron demonstrates hemosiderin-laden macrophages. Prussian blue. C. Similar Prussian blue staining material is present adjacent to collagen fibers surrounding a pulmonary artery. (Prussian blue.) A B c colleagues130 describe capillary endothelial swelling and focal thickening of the basement membrane. Stainable iron is present in alveolar and tissue macrophages, free in connective tissues and encrusting elastic fibers of small blood vessels and alveolar septa. There is mild to moderate alveolar cell hyperplasia, peribronchial lymphoid hyperplasia, and alveolar septal mastocytosis. l3l Immunofluorescence is negative for immunoglobulin complement and antibasement membrane antibodies. 131 Whereas IPH is ordinarily regarded as a pediatric condition, Goodpasture syndrome is usually diagnosed in young men (see Chapter 29) . Cases have, however, been reported in children, including a 10-year-old girl.89 An immunoglobulin G (IgG) autoantibody to glomerular basement membrane, which cross-reacts with the alveolar basement membrane, is the sine qua non for the diagnosis of Goodpasture syndrome. However, pulmonary hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis of an immune complex type are more common than Goodpasture syndrome. Henoch-Schonlein purpura, Wegener granulomatosis, and poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis with hemorrhagic pulmonary edema produce a Goodpasture-like syndrome in children. 132 When the lung biopsy is examined by immunofluorescence, fine linear staining for IgG is present in the region of the alveolar basement membrane in a pattern virtually identical to the glomerular basement membrane. 133 Hyaline membranes, capillaritis in the alveolar septum, and a mononuclear infiltration of the interstitium, in addition to the alveolar hemorrhage, are other features in the lung biopsy of antibasement membrane antibody-associated Goodpasture syndrome (Fig. 7.31 ). Surfactant deficiency is a common and consistent feature of prematurity, but may also occur from damage to type II pneumocytes resulting from pulmonary hemorrhage, pneumonia, atelectasis, or pulmonary edema. 93 The hypoplastic lungs of infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia may also show a temporary deficiency of surfac-tantY4 Replacement of the temporarily depleted surfactant and support of the infant until the type II pneumocytes recover (or mature) is often sufficient for a good outcome. 93 It has only been in the last 10 to 15 years that congenital deficiencies of the surfactant proteins have been identified, starting with Nogee et al. 135 in 1993, when they noted a deficiency of surfactant protein B in a case of congenital alveolar proteinosis. Subsequently deficiencies of surfactant proteins Band C have been reported. [136] [137] [138] [139] [140] [141] [142] [143] [144] Inherited deficiency of surfactant protein B (SP-B) is a fatal autosomal recessive disorder of lung cell metabolism caused most frequently by a frameshift mutation in codon 121 of the SP-B gene (l2lins2) with an approximate gene frequency of 1 in 3000 to 5000 individuals. 145 The disease is characterized by rapidly progressive respiratory failure immediately after birth associated with a diffuse ground-glass appearance to the lungs radiographically along with markedly prominent interlobular septa. 146 ,147 Other novel mutation sites have also been described. 148 Chorionic villous sampling can be used to identify the homozygous state in utero. 149 Less frequently, abnormalities of surfactant proteins A and C may occur in association with SP-B deficiency,l50-152 but only recently had a true deficiency state of surfactant protein C been described.153.154 Lung transplantation has been successful, although patients may develop an antisurfactant protein antibody. 155 Grossly the lungs in congenital surfactant deficiency are heavy and appear consolidated. Microscopically in the early stages, alveoli are lined by a continuous layer of cuboidal alveolar lining cells (Fig. 7.32 ). As the disease progresses, alveoli may be filled with eosinophilic granular material admixed with desquamated alveolar cells and macrophages resembling congenital alveolar proteinosis ( Fig. 7.33 ). In the later stages, alveolar septa are widened by fibroblasts producing alveolar septal fibrosis, although the alveolar cell hyperplasia persists (Fig. 7.34 ). Immunohistochemical stains of type II alveolar lining cells with SP-B or -C may be used to establish the appropriate deficiency state.  Pneumonia is one of the most common serious infection in newborn infants.156 There are four basic categories of pneumonia in the fetus and neonate, based on the time and mode of acquiring the infection: (1) transplacental (generalized infection), (2) intrauterine pneumonia (a stillborn fetus or an infant who has survived for a few days), (3) perinatal pneumonia (acquired in the birth canal), and (4) postnatal pneumonia. I57 The latter is a complication of nursery or other environmental exposures. Incidence figures of congenital-perinatal pneumonia vary among series, but it is estimated that 10% to 20% of all neonatal deaths are attributed to pneumonia. Neonatal sepsis is accompanied by pneumonia in virtually all cases. I57 Only FIGURE 7.34. Surfactant protein C deficiency. In this I-year-old boy who died after prolonged respiratory distress, alveolar septal fibrosis is noted along with alveolar cell hyperplasia. (Masson trichrome.) a minority of pulmonary infections are acquired transplacentally; the majority are secondary to an ascending infection through prolonged ruptured membranes, birth asphyxia, or a contaminated birth canal. 158 Because the clinical manifestations are predominantly those of respiratory distress in the neonate, it is difficult to differentiate pneumonia from hyaline membrane disease. A congenital infection results when the fetus comes into contact with a potential pathogen; the acquisition of the infection is either by the transplacental hematogenous route or shortly before delivery through the ascending route. In the latter case, the distinction between a congenital and perinatal infection is not always possible or necessary. A perinatal infection may be generalized or localized to one system, in contrast to a congenital infection, which is usually systemic and may have teratogenic effects if it occurs early in development. Congenital pneumonia secondary to an organism crossing the placenta is well documented or strongly suggested for the following pathogens: cytomegalovirus, rubella, herpes simplex, Toxoplasma gondii, coxsackie virus B, Treponema pallidum, and Listeria monocytogenes. 157 Vaginal flora gain access to the amniotic sac with prolonged rupture of membranes and produce chorioamnionitis with or without an acquired congenital pneumonia; these organisms include various gram-negative coliform bacteria, Candida albicans, L. monocytogenes, and group B ~-hemolytic streptococcus. Delivery through an infected birth canal may expose the infant not only to the aforementioned organisms but also to cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, S. aureus, Chlamydia trachomatis, Ureaplasma, and Mycoplasma. 1S7 Aspiration of these organisms into the respiratory tract or sepsis is B the mode of infection. If the inflammatory exudate in the lungs is accompanied by amniotic contents, such as squamous cells or meconium, this supports the conclusion that aspiration occurred in a distressed fetus. Epidemiologic studies based in part on seroconversion in mothers and children and detection of virus in the urine have established that the cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the most commonly transmitted pathogen in utero.159.160 It has been estimated that there are 33,000 cases of congenital CMV per year in the United States; only 5% to 10% of these infants actually become symptomatic. 161 The incidence of congenital CMV varies among series, which reflects differences in a number of important socioeconomic factors; the range is 0.24% to 2.2% for liveborn infants, and the highest rates of congenital CMV are found in those maternal populations with the greatest prepregnancy exposure to the viruS.162-164 It appears that these maternal reactivation infections are transmitted to the fetus, but their effects are ameliorated when compared to the more serious fetal consequences of a primary maternal infection. Viral exposure of the fetus to a reactivation infection is less likely than is the primary infection to result in microcephaly, neonatal hepatitis, growth retardation, thrombocytopenia, deafness, and chorioretinitis. 165 Interstitial pneumonitis occurs in only 1 % or less of symptomatic congenital CMV, whereas it is a more common manifestation of a perina tally or neonatally acquired infection. These infants are infected by secretions from the birth canal, from mother's milk, or from a contaminated blood transfusion. Viruria in perinatal CMV is not present for several weeks, this being the incubation period for CMV The frequency (5% to 10%) of a clinically apparent infection in children with perinatal CMV is basically identical to congenital CMV Unlike the multisystem involvement in congenital CMV, interstitial pneumonitis may be the only clinical expression of perinatal CMV Stagno and associates 166 prospectively evaluated 45 infants with perinatal CMV, and four had interstitial pneumonitis. In addition to CMV, copathogens such as Chlamydia, Ureaplasma, and Pneumocystis jiroveci have been isolated in a minority of cases. 167 When these children in the first few months of life present with fever, poor feeding, and tachypnea, a diagnosis of CMV pneumonitis is not an initial consideration since the exposure to the virus is invariably a subclinical event. The lung is regarded as the site with the highest yield for the identification of the characteristic 5-to 10-llm intranuclear inclusions in the enlarged (25-to 40-llm) epithelial cells or in the commonly infected exfoliated alveolar macrophages (Fig. 7.35 ).168 Cytoplasmic inclusions have a linear or curved configuration; they are usually periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) pOSItive, somewhat amphophilic, and are often aggregated opposite to the inclusion-bearing nucleus. When the specimen is an autopsied lung, there is usually little difficulty in the identification of CMV since it is possible to liberally sample the material. Even in a macerated stillborn fetus, the CMV-bearing cells are sufficiently well preserved in an otherwise autolyzed background to make a diagnosis possible. 168 ,169 Although the CMV inclusion is easily recognized as such in most cases, an enlarged amphophilic nucleolus in a reactive alveolar lining cell or other types of inclusions may evoke uncertainty that can be resolved by immunohistochemistry. It is unnecessary in most cases to resort to the latter technique except to confirm the diagnosis. We have found immunohistochemistry especially helpful in the demonstration of the less apparent cytoplasmic inclusions. The in situ polymerase chain reaction has also been employed on fixed specimens for the diagnosis of cytomegalovirus infection yo Most experience with CMV pneumonitis is confined to lung biopsies from institutions with larger populations of immunocompromised children and adults. l7l -175 In addition to an interstitial inflammatory infiltrate,176 evidence of alveolar damage with plump lining cells, hyaline membranes, hemorrhage, and macrophages are common histologic features even in the neonateYo However, these inflammatory and reactive changes are inconspicuous in the lungs of stillborn infants with CMV. Because the lungs have not inflated in the stillborn, we have found it difficult to judge the presence of an interstitial inflammatory reaction. Focal lymphocytic collections in a peribronchiolar location or a minimal lymphocytic or plasmacellular infiltration in the interstitium is seen more frequently in the neonatal lung. The pneumonitis in perinatal acquired CMV more closely resembles the infection of later childhood. l7l ,177 A flocculent alveolar exudate may be the clue to a coinfection by P. jiroveci, but even in the absence of these changes, a methenamine silver stain is a justified routine. Necrosis in the lung should also alert one to the possibility of a co-infection since CMV pneumonitis alone is rarely accompanied by necrosis. Congenital lobar emphysema, eventration of the diaphragm, and hypoplasia of the lung are other less common intrathoracic complications of congenital-perinatal CMv. 178 Most neonates with herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection have clinical manifestations, unlike the majority of infants with the more common cytomegalovirus. A minority of cases of HSV are acquired in utero (congenital)179-182; exposure to genital secretions during the second stage of delivery accounts for the predominant HSV-2 infection (80% of cases).183,184 Risk factors for neonatal HSV disease include first-episode maternal infection in the third trimester, invasive monitoring, delivery before 38 weeks, and maternal age of less than 21 years. 18S After the neonate is infected with HSV, an incubation period of 2 to 12 days (occasionally 2 to 4 weeks) culminates in symptoms and signs in the first 2 weeks of life. 186 The severity of the neonatal infection, as with cytomegalovirus, is determined to some degree by the type of maternal infection, whether primary or recurrent. However, there is any number of cases of neonatal HSV in which viral shedding was not apparent or recognized at birth. These are the unfortunate de novo cases. Neonatal HSV is either generalized (40% to 65% of cases) or localized to the brain, eyes, skin, or oral mucous membranes (35 % to 60% of cases ).187 The central nervous system is infected in approximately 80% of infants with disseminated HSv. [188] [189] [190] [191] Cutaneous vesicles are often the J.T. Stocker et al. first sign, followed by the constitutional symptoms. l92 Only one organ may be the predominant site of clinical abnormalities or the infection may severely compromise several organs, resulting in multisystem failure. Pneumonia (Fig. 7.36 ) is reported as one of the less common presenting features of HSV I93 ; it is usually accompanied by other, often more serious extrapulmonary manifestations.192 If the infection is confined to the skin, the prognosis is excellent. 194 The use of antiviral agents in cases at which neonates are at risk for developing generalized herpes simplex infection has markedly reduced the incidence of this disease and has even decreased the mortality (from 85% to 29%) in those infants who do develop generalized infection. 186 ,194-198 The lungs are heavier than normal, have petechiae on the pleural surfaces, and are variably hemorrhagic or consolidated on the cut surface. 199 Bloody fluid exudes from the surface. Necrosis is generally not apparent from the gross inspection, but diffuse parenchymal nodularity may  indicate that secondary bronchopneumonia has occurred. The herpetic inclusions vary in appearance from a sharply delineated acidophilic structure surrounded by a halo and marginated chromatin to a smudged, amphophilic inclusion replacing the nucleoplasm. Both mononuclear and multinucleated cells contain the inclusion(s). Cytomegaly is not a feature of the infected cells. If needed, immunohistochemistry or polymerase chain reaction for HSV can be performed.2°o. 201 Focal necrosis and a background of alveolar damage and hemorrhage should suggest the possibility of HSV pneumonitis even before the characteristic inclusions are found. The inclusions are present in alveolar macrophages and interstitial cells at or near the margins of necrosis. It may be necessary to examine several microscopic sections before the inclusions are identified. In a few cases, even in the presence of inclusions in other organs (adrenals, liver, brain, skin), the diagnostic cells may be difficult to find in the lungs because of extensive necrosis; careful search may be required. The lung may also have features of massive pulmonary hemorrhage, diffuse alveolar damage with hyaline membranes, fibrin thrombi in small vessels, or nonspecific interstitial pneumonitis. Neutrophils in the peripheral air spaces may indicate secondary bacterial pneumonia in an infant who has survived long enough to develop this complication. The herpesvirus varicella-zoster had been a very common contagious childhood infection until the advent of a varicella vaccine 202 ; now most cases seen are in immunocompromised or immunosuppressed patients.203-2o6 Only one case of varicella-zoster is reported in every 7500 pregnancies. 207 Varicella embryopathy (hypoplasia of extremities, cutaneous scarring, growth retardation, and neuro-ophthalmic damage) occurs in fetuses who are infected between the eighth and 19th week of gestation. 208 An infection in the last 4 days of gestation or within 2 days of birth results in severe generalized varicella with a very poor prognosis. Beyond this period, the infection is mild. Fewer than 100 cases of varicella have been reported in the perinatal-neonatal period. [209] [210] [211] The pathologic findings in the lungs are similar if not indistinguishable from herpes simplex pneumonitis, including the appearance of the intranuclear inclusions.l7l Diffuse alveolar damage, hyaline membranes, and interstitial inflammation and focal necrosis are the principal microscopic features. While vaccination for rubella has been utilized for years, isolated infection and epidemics still occur. 212 -215 Classic 201 rubella embryopathy (cataracts, deafness, and congenital heart disease including patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, and central and peripheral pulmonic stenosis) is the consequence of an in utero infection during the first two trimesters. 216 If the mother is seronegative in a nonepidemic period, 1 per 25,000 pregnancies is complicated by rubella embryopathy. 217 The expanded syndrome is manifested by thrombocytopenia purpura, neonatal hepatitis, encephalitis, and pneumonitis. Respiratory distress may be apparent soon after birth, or may be delayed for several weeks or months in infants with rubella pneumonitis. Gradual resolution of symptoms and signs is generally the case. Rosenberg and associates 218 indicated that pneumonitis with the late lesions of congenital rubella is probably a superimposed infection rather than rubella itself. Interstitial pneumonitis with or without fibrosis is the less than specific finding in the lung. Multinucleated measles giant cells may be striking in some cases ( Fig.  7.37 ). It is safe to conclude that a diagnosis of rubella  Listeria monocytogenes, a gram-positive rod, is one of the three nonviral organisms (the others are Toxoplasma gondii and Treponema pallidum) that spread from an infected mother through the placenta resulting in fetal sepsis. 219 ,22o However, the infant may be infected through the amniotic cavity, at the time of delivery through an infected birth canal, or in an infrequent nursery epidemic. 221 ,222 Lallemand and associates 223 documented the presence of listeriosis in 3% of second-trimester abortions. A spontaneous abortion occurred shortly after the mother had become febrile. The clinical manifestations of fetal, perinatal, and neonatal listeriosis vary, but cutaneous pustules, respiratory distress, and hepatic dysfunction are among the more common features. 157 ,224 In the premature infant with respiratory symptoms, BPD and streptococcal pneumonia are plausible considerations. 224 Later-onset listeriosis at 2 to 3 weeks of age is characterized by meningitis. 225 Villi tis and focal necrosis or abscess formation in the placenta are the hallmarks of intrauterine septicemia 226 ; chorioamnionitis and decidual abscesses are more typical of the ascending infection. Abscesses are present in multiple organs, including the lungs, in the septic fetus.227 Aspiration of infected vaginal secretions produces bronchopneumonia with necrotizing and hemorrhagic features. Congenital syphilis is a complex disease with a host of clinical signs and symptoms. 228 The transmission of the spirochetes from an infected mother to the fetus may occur at any time during pregnancy. 229 The resurgence of syphilis in the United States over the past two decades (and the high prevalence throughout the developing countries of the world) has also been manifested by an increase in the incidence of congenital syphilis.23O-233 Poor or nonexistent prenatal care and substance abuse by mothers have contributed significantly to the virtual epidemic of congenital syphilis.234-236 The diagnosis of congenital syphilis may be unsuspected initially, but should be considered in a stillborn with evidence of nonimmune hydrops fetalis, hepatomegaly, and cutaneous lesions. 237 -239 So-called pneumonia alba is one of the classic pathologic features of congenital syphilis. There is delayed maturation of the lung and a severe fibrosing process with a zonal distribution. 240 The inflammatory reaction mainly consists of scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells in the interstitium. These infiltrates may be confused with extramedullary hematopoiesis. A superimposed bacterial J.T. Stocker et al. pneumonia is suggested by the presence of neutrophils. Spirochetes are often present in large numbers. Toxoplasmosis is the most common parasitic infection in the United States, according to some investigators. 241 ,242 The facultative intracellular coccidia, Toxoplasma gondii, produces a number of clinical syndromes, ranging from a flu-like illness to an overwhelming septic infection affecting multiple organs including the brain, heart, and eye. An infection during pregnancy is usually inconsequential to the mother but may have drastic effects on the fetus, depending on the time during gestation when the organisms pass through the placenta. 219 ,243 The fetus of a seronegative primipara with an acute mononucleosis syndrome has a 25% to 40% chance of being infected. Maternal toxoplasmosis between the third and sixth months of gestation is the most vulnerable period for a severe fetal infection.244 Only 10% to 20% of seropositive infants are clinically ill at birth. 245 The complex of congenital toxoplasmosis (cerebral calcifications, chorioretinitis, thrombocytopenia) is similar to congenital cytomegalovirus. 184 Pneumonitis is present in 35% to 40% of neonates with generalized toxoplasmosis. 246 These children have respiratory distress, which may constitute a significant problem in management. Unless and until the encysted organisms are identified in the lung, the pulmonary changes are indistinguishable from other interstitial pneumonitides.247 There is widening of the alveolar septa by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate, and focal collections of alveolar macrophages are present in distal air spaces. The cysts are found in macrophages, endothelium, smooth muscle, and epithelial cells. In 2001, van den Hoogen and colleagues 248 isolated a paramyxovirus from 28 children in the Netherlands that they identified as a tentative new member of the Metapneumovirus genus based on virological data, sequence homology, and gene constellation. Subsequent studies have shown it to be a major cause of acute respiratory tract disease in normal infants and children worldwide, with a seasonal occurrence and spectrum of clinical illness most similar to the closely related respiratory syncytial virus. 249 The greatest prevalence of severe disease requiring hospitalization in otherwise healthy children appears to be in those aged between 6 and 12 months, older than the peak age of hospitalizations for respiratory syncytial virus. 250 Currently there is no rapid diagnostic assay, and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction is the most widely used method in confirming the diagnosis. 251 ,252 Metapneumovirus is thought to account for about 6% to 10% of respiratory tract infections in which a common respiratory virus, such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), or influenza or parainfluenza viruses, could not be detected.250.253 In a study of 1505 children with respiratory infection, Bosis et aU 54 detected metapneumovirus in 42 children (2.8%), RSV in 143 (9.5%), and influenza viruses in 230 (15.3%). Of the 42 metapneumovirus-positive samples, one was also positive for RSV and six for influenza viruses, for a co-infection rate of 16.7%. In addition, the authors noted that metapneumovirus was identified only in patients with acute respiratory infection, whereas RSV and influenza viruses were also detected in patients with different clinical manifestations. 254 Symptoms associated with metapneumovirus include cough, dyspnea, wheeze, and hypoxia. The viral infection appears to primarily affect airway epithelium with the epithelial cells undergoing degeneration and necrosis, eliciting a neutrophilic response and increased mucus production. 255 Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) may show the respiratory epithelial cell degeneration or necrosis along with ciliocytophthoria and round red cytoplasmic inclusions. Other features of the BAL include alveolar macrophages containing hemosiderin, abundant neutrophils, and prominent mucus. 255 The clinical and pathologic picture may be confused with that of severe acute respiratory syndrome-associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) infection (see below and Chapter 11). [256] [257] [258] Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome-Associated Coronavirus Originating in Guangdong, southern China, at the end of 2002, severe acute respiratory syndrome spread to regions all over the world and affected well over 8000 people. 259 The causative virus, a novel coronavirus, was identified by a World Health Organization (WHO)-led network of laboratories. 2S7 ,26o Zeng et aU61 studied 33 children with this syndrome in the Guangzhou area of China. The infection affected boys and girls equally with an age range of 3 months to 13 years. Five (15%) of the cases had an evident history of being exposed to a SARS patient before the symptoms occurred. The clinical features included fever (100%), often higher that 39°C, and cough (91 % ), both productive and nonproductive. The white blood count was normal or low in 67% of the cases. The predominant cell was the lymphocyte. Chest radiographs showed rapidly changing patchy infiltrates, with both unilateral and bilateral involvement. Supportive treatment included isolation and antibiotics to prevent bacterial infection, and resulted in the recovery of all the children. 261 The lung pathology, fortunately, is rarely seen in children because of their frequent recovery. However, in 203 adults who have died, diffuse alveolar damage is commonly seen, with other morphologic changes including bronchial epithelial denudation, loss of cilia, and squamous metaplasia. 256 Less frequent findings include giantcell infiltrate, pronounced increase in macrophages in the alveoli and the interstitium of the lung, and hemophagocytosis. Electron microscopy revealed viral particles in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells corresponding to coronavirus (see also Chapter 11) . 256 Human Immunodeficiency Virus Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is the eventual consequence in most individuals of a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1 or, infrequently, HIV-2) infection. Approximately 2% of all reported AIDS cases in the United States are diagnosed in individuals younger than 13 years old. 262 The overwhelming majority of pediatric cases (80% to 90%) throughout the world are recognized in children 2 years old or younger who had acquired HIV through vertical transmission from an infected mother. 263 In countries where appropriate treatment of the mother is available, the rate have fallen to as low as 2%.264-266 Some infants are seemingly infected in utero, but other neonates may acquire the virus intra-or peripartum. Even though the virus is transmitted across the placenta in some or most cases, neither villitis nor other pathologic evidence of infection, including pneumonia, has been documented in the fetus or neonate. 267 The remaining HIV-AIDS cases in the pediatric age popUlation are the results of an infected blood transfusion (uncommon in the United States) or sexual contact with a HIV-infected individual; these patients are more commonly older children or adolescents. Pulmonary complications of HIV-AIDS are manifested in 70% or more of infected children, especially among infants.268-27o Rather than opportunistic microorganisms, infants often have recurrent bacterial infections from Haemophilus injluenzae type b, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and S. aureus, or mucosal candidiasis. 271 Among the serious opportunistic infections, P. jiroveci pneumonia is one of the most common in children and has been reported in almost 40% of pediatric cases. 272 Organisms are often identified in a BAL or transbronchial biopsy.273 A frothy alveolar exudate with abundant cysts is very often absent, and in its place is seen a pattern of diffuse alveolar injury and even granulomas of an epithelioid type without caseous necrosis.274 Measles, herpes simplex, varicella, and RSV are known to cause severe, if not fatal, pneumonia in HIV-infected children, just as these viruses are responsible for pneumonitis in children with one of the primary immunodeficiency syndromes. 275 The infections in the previous sections are typically acquired at some point during gestation, even during the first stage of delivery. This section is concerned principally with those infections that are acquired perinatally and are manifested in the first days or weeks of life. Most of these infections are ultimately traced to the mother, and occasionally to the father. Mothers can infect their children postnatally, but extramaternal sources (the nursery and its personnel, mechanical devices, and other family members) are important in the etiology of neonatal pneumonias. The incidence of pneumonia is particularly high in premature infants in the presence of chorioamnionitis. 276 Group B ~-Hemolytic Streptococcus Two bacteria, group B p-hemolytic streptococcus (GBS) and Escherichia coli, are together responsible for the majority of cases of neonatal sepsis, pneumonia, and meningitis. 277 The overall incidence of GBS disease is 2 to 3 cases per 1,000 live births; premature or low-weightfor-date infants have an even greater risk of infection. 278 There is a correlation between the degree of cervicovaginal colonization and the acquisition rate of GBS disease in the neonate.279 Prolonged rupture of membranes and low birth weight enhance the risk for infection. Earlyonset GBS disease in the first day of life is characterized by symptoms and signs of respiratory distress and radiographic changes resembling early BPD. The infection evolves very rapidly and terminates in death in 50% to 75% of cases unless quickly diagnosed and appropriately treated. When GBS disease has a delayed onset, the prognosis is more favorable. 280 A documented association of GBS disease is the delay in the clinical presentation of a right-sided diaphragmatic hernia. 281 ,282 The pathologic findings of GBS in the lungs ( 7. Acquired Nonneoplastic Neonatal and Pediatric Diseases similar to BPD with a hypoaerated appearance and widespread HMs in underexpanded air spaces. Diffuse alveolar and interstitial hemorrhage simulates massive pulmonary hemorrhage of the newborn. There is a minimal neutrophilic infiltrate in the first few hours of the infection; the Gram stain shows clumps of gram-positive cocci in the air spaces and within the HMs, and appropriate bacteriologic cultures establish the diagnosis. Antibiotic therapy may interfere with the results of culture and the demonstration of the bacteria. A focal or confluent neutrophilic exudate in the alveoli is present in the lungs of infants who survive 12 to 24 hours. Abscesses are usually not found. Chlamydia has long been known as the etiologic agent of neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis, but its role in genital tract infections in adults has been the subject of recent interest. 284 At the time of delivery, the cervix is infected by Chlamydia in approximately 10% of mothers. 285.286 Conjunctivitis is the most typical form of Chlamydia infection (20% to 25%); it is encountered in 1 to 4 infants per 1000 live births.287 Pneumonitis occurs in 3% to 18% of cases and is preceded by conjunctivitis in a number of infants.288-29o Approximately 30% to 40% of all infectious pneumonitides in the first 6 months of life are caused by Chlamydia. Most of these cases are clinically mild; however, 25% of infants have moderate-tosevere respiratory distress.z 91 Bilateral interstitial or reticulonodular infiltrates and hyperexpanded segments are the radiographic findings. The overall prognosis is excellent. 288 The diagnosis of Chlamydia is based on the results of tissue culture and the detection of the specific IgM antibody. Infected cells contain an intracytoplasmic inclusion on Giemsa-stained material from the eye or nasopharynx. Fortunately, there are very few opportunities to examine lung tissue from these patients. Various case reports report a necrotizing bronchiolitis and a mononuclear cell infiltrate (Fig. 7.39 ). An interstitial pneumonia without specific histologic features was seen by Beem and Saxon 292 in open lung biopsies from two infants. Too few cases of chlamydia pneumonitis have been described to allow any definite characterization (see also Chapter 12) .293 The presence of Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Mycoplasma hominis, and Ureaplasma urealyticum in the lower genital tract explains the occasional neonatal pneumonia caused by one of these organisms. Mycoplasma pneumonia is generally uncommon in children less than 6 dissemination to the various organs including the lungs, caseous granulomas are uncommon (Fig. 7.40 ). Collections of histiocytes are present in the terminal air spaces in a distribution like bronchopneumonia, but there is an absence of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells. IT. Stocker et al. Candidiasis is the most common fungal infection of the neonatal period. Most of these infants have a localized infection in the oral cavity known as thrush. Approximately 4 % of neonates develop thrush, which is probably acquired from organisms in the maternal cervicovaginal secretions. 307 In the past several years, candidiasis in premature infants has emerged as an important complication in neonatal intensive care units. These infants are extremely vulnerable to infections, and the parenteral route from intravascular catheters is well established both clinically and pathologically. Low birth weight infants, however, are at a much higher risk of developing pulmonary candidiasis, with Frezza et a1. 308 noting an incidence of 8.6% in 233 infants with a birth weight under 1250 g. There are a few examples of intrauterine infections from organisms in the vagina gaining access to the amniotic cavity and producing chorioamnionitis. 309 These infants have the expected early onset of respiratory distress, usually related to BPD. Symptoms and signs of sepsis ensue, and the radiographic findings are the combination of progressive bronchopulmonary dysplasia and focal or patchy parenchymal consolidation. 31O The latter may evolve into diffuse consolidation (Fig. 7.41 ). Aggressive antibiotic therapy and other supportive measures are imperative to avoid the inevitable outcome. The gross and microscopic changes in the lungs may vary by virtue of the mode of candidal spread via the bronchopulmonary, vascular emboli, or systemically disseminated routes. Among the 14 autopsy cases that Kassner et a1. 310 examined, 50% of the infants had embolization of an infected thrombus from a major vein or right-sided heart valve to the lungs with one or several peripheral hemorrhagic infarcts. 311 · 312 The lungs were diffusely consolidated and hemorrhagic in those cases of systemic candidiasis. Nodularity on palpation of the gross specimen may suggest the presence of abscesses or secondary bronchopneumonia. A shaggy, fibrinopurulent exudate alternating with denuded tracheobronchial mucosa in association with parenchymal consolidation was present in those cases of direct extension from the oropharynx. Yeasts and pseudohyphae are easily identified in the mucosal exudate, but the invasive organisms may be obscured by the hemorrhage and necrosis. Occluded pulmonary vessels in the region of an infarct are often highlighted by a dense tangle of pseudohyphae invading the vessel wall in a similar manner as does Aspergillus or Mucor. Microabscesses with a minimal exudative component and rarely a granulomatous reaction are the features of capillary invasive candidiasis. An occasional case has more than one pattern of pulmonary involvement by Candida, or several simultaneous processes may be present as well, including BPD and secondary bacterial A B pneumonia. Separation of the various pathologic findings in the lung is a difficult and complicated problem that is best approached with a thorough knowledge of the clinical events (see also Chapter 10). Fungal infections other than candidiasis in the neonatalearly infancy period are extremely rare.313 Pulmonary cryptococcosis is highly unusual in children unless they are immunosuppressed or have AIDS.314 Four cases of coccidioidomycosis in infants younger than 3 months old were reported by Child The interstitium of the lung is heavily infiltrated by mature plasma cells in classic infantile pneumocystosis ( Fig. 7.42) . A flocculent, intra alveolar exudate containing the encysted organisms and a nonspecific, variably dense interstitial inflammatory infiltrate are the microscopic features usually associated with Pneumocystis pneumonia. However, a number of other tissue reactions accompany the infection, including poorly formed granulomas, diffuse alveolar damage, and dystrophic calcification. Touch imprints from a positive lung biopsy or material from a bronchoalveolar and tracheal aspiration stained with methenamine silver demonstrate the 1-to 2-~m round to crescentic-shaped organisms in clustered or individual cysts (see Chapter 13) .317 The respiratory syncytial virus, a RNA virus, is the single most important lower respiratory tract pathogen in childhood; it is responsible for the largest number of hospitalizations in the first year of life, and it results in 3000 to 4000 deaths in the United States each year. 318 The peak incidence of lower respiratory tract infections in children occurs in the first year of life, and by 2 to 3 years of age virtually 100% of children have been infected.318 The spectrum of pulmonary clinical manifestations ranges from mild upper tract illness, which progresses to apnea in premature infants, pneumonia, and bronchiolitis. The pediatric population at risk for increased mortality and morbidity during RSV infection includes premature infants, infants with cyanotic congenital heart disease, HIV-infected subjects, and patients on intensive immunosuppressive therapy especially after bone marrow transplant. 319 • 32o The symptomatology of classic RSV-associated bronchiolitis is coughing and wheezing, except in infants under 4 weeks of age, who are more likely to have an atypical pneumonia. 321 Co-infection with other viruses, particularly metapneumovirus, has been documented and apparently increases the severity of the bronchiolitis and the need for hospitalization.322-325 For older children with underlying chronic disease or an HIV-infected child, the prognosis is poorer than for the immunologically intact child. 326 The pathologic anatomy of RSV is discussed at length in Chapter 11. Papillary hyperplasia of bronchiolar epi-J.T. Stocker et al. Note the many plasma cells in the alveolar septa, a feature not typically seen in immunocompromised children with P. jiroveci pneumonia. C. A silver stain demonstrates the saucer-shaped organisms. (Gomori methenamine silver.) thelium and distal mucous plugging are the principal microscopic features (Fig. 7.43 ). Human papilloma virus is the general designation for a family of related DNA viruses with a number of distinct serotypes having a tropism for keratinizing epithelium. One subtype of human papilloma virus, type 6, is the etiologic agent for condyloma acuminatum and juvenile laryngeal papillomatosis. 327 Fewer than 0.1 % of infants develop laryngeal papillomatosis, but in those with lesions, 50% or more of their mothers have documented genital tract involvement. There is a predilection for first-born infants. The initial lesions are found on the true vocal cords. The natural history is characterized by multiple local recurrences and even spread beyond the larynx into the hypopharynx, trachea, and even the lung (Fig. 7.44) . 328 There Pulmonary involvement by papillomatosis is the consequence of fragmentation or contiguous extension into the tracheobronchial tree (Fig. 7.44 ). 329 The proliferation of squamous epithelium retains its papillomatous configuration in the bronchus. Hyperplastic squamous epithelium with surface koilocytosis with accompanying cytologic atypia is the characteristic microscopic appearance. In some cases, the cellular atypia is sufficiently disturbing as to suggest carcinoma in situ. It is best to reserve the diagnosis of carcinoma for those cases with an unequivocal invasion. Many different types of major and minor viruses have been reported as etiologic agents of pneumonia in the neonatal period. Adenovirus (Fig. 7.45 ) has been implicated in the development of bronchiolitis obliterans,332 209 a granular pink cytoplasm with focal round smooth areas about the size of a red blood cell and usually located near nuclei. D. Immunoperoxidase stain for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) demonstrates the positivity of the cytoplasmic inclusions noted in C as well as many other smaller RSV positive granules. and adenovirus type 7h was reported in 29 children (83% under 1 year of age) with pneumonia and bronchiolitis (see Chapter 11).333 The enteroviruses, echovirus and Coxsackie, are responsible for isolated cases of pneumonia in the newborn period. Virtually all the gram-negative enteric bacilli, particularly E. coli, are causes of perinatal pneumonia. 334 ,335 Streptococcus pneumoniae sepsis is a rare infection of the neonatal period 336 ; Bergqvist and Trovik 337 reported three cases that simulated GBS infection, Nursery epidemics of S aureus are manifested as necrotizing bronchopneumonia. H. influenzae type B is one of the important causes of meningitis in infancy, but it is also the etiologic agent for a segmental pneumonia in children between 3 and 12 months of age. 338 The pathologic appearance is one of clusters of squamous epithelium growing along alveolar septa (left) and, as a solid mass (center), pushing aside the parenchyma. E. The metaplastic squamous epithelium that has fragmented from the laryngeal papillomatosis and lodged in the lung grows along alveolar septa and is dysplastic with hyperchromatic nuclei and prominent mitoses. Gonzalez and colleagues 345 analyzed autopsies of 98 patients with Down syndrome and found small subpleural cysts in 19 patients. They suggested that the cysts result from reduced postnatal production of peripheral small air passages and alveoli, reflecting the slow rate of cell proliferation seen in Down syndrome. Stocker and colleagues341.346 believe that the peripheral cysts develop through liquefaction necrosis of the lung secondary to hypoperfusion of that area, as the result of either pulmonary artery occlusion or possibly altered blood flow associated with a cardiovascular anomaly (Figs. 7.46 and 7.47). Preservation of the central portion of the lung is accomplished through an intact bronchial artery circulation supplying both the bronchial tree and adjacent pulmonary parenchyma through direct bronchopulmonary arteries and anastomoses between pulmonary arteries and bronchial arteries (Table 7  An intralobar sequestration is a segment of pulmonary parenchyma invested along with the normal right or left lung by visceral pleura and supplied by a systemic artery (Fig. 7.48 ). The segment is usually isolated from the tracheobronchial tree but may be partially air containing. 347 Intralobar sequestration is seen slightly more frequently in males than females (1.1 :1). Symptoms of cough, sputum production, and recurrent pneumonia are noted in 85% of patients, approximately 25% of whom present before the age of 10.348-350 Intralobar sequestration, however, is rarely seen in infants. In a review by the first author (J.T.S.) of 42,000 autopsies of infants less than 2 months of age, not a single case of intralobar sequestration was noted, while 12 cases of extralobar sequestration were seen. 351 Intralobar sequestration has been described in only about 20 infants under 5 years of age. [352] [353] [354] Radiographic findings are variable. Cystic areas, some with fluid levels, are present in homogeneous or inhomogeneous shadows. 35o Bronchography displays the lack of connection to the bronchial system in about 85% of cases, with the remaining cases displaying some communication between the bronchial tree and the sequestration. Nuclear lung scan may show collateral ventilation of an intralobar A FIGURE 7.48. Intralobar pulmonary sequestration. A. A composite drawing of an intralobar sequestration of the right lower lobe with cysts with air-fluid levels apparent on x-ray and in the gross specimen. Note the systemic artery arising from the aorta and supplying the sequestered portion of the lung. 213 sequestration when direct communication cannot be demonstrated. 355 Arteriography demonstrates the single (84 %) or multiple (16%) systemic arteries supplying the sequestration, the basis on which the diagnosis of intralobar sequestration is made. 356 ,357 Arterial supply is via the thoracic aorta in 74% of cases, the abdominal aorta or celiac axis in 20%, and the intercostal arteries in 4% (Fig. 7.49 Venous return in intralobar sequestration is via the normal pulmonary veins in more than 95 % of cases 356 ; the remaining cases drain partially or completely into the hemiazygos, azygos, or intercostal veins, or the inferior or superior vena cava. 348 Walford et al. 364 described the presence of abnormal systemic arteries supplying the lower lobe of the lung in four fetuses examined with in utero ultrasound and, following elective termination of the pregnancy, in the anatomic specimen. The systemic artery of three of the fetuses arose from the thoracic aorta and the fourth from the celiac axis. Two additional cases from this hospital went to term, were delivered and were asymptomatic, although the persistence of the abnormal artery was confirmed by computed tomography (CT).352 None of these six cases involved a sequestered portion of the lung (i.e., a section of lung within the normal pleural investment of the lung but anatomically separated from lung) and they represent vascular abnormalities. Similar vascular abnormalities have been noted by other investigators,365 and all of these involved a normal pulmonary venouS return from the involved segment of lung. 366 Intralobar sequestrations are located on the left side in 55% of cases and on the right in 45%. Bilateral involvement has rarely been reported. The lower lobes are involved in 98% of cases with the posterobasal segment affected in 81 %. Upper-lobe involvement has been reported in only eight cases. 347 Associated anomalies are present in approximately 12 % of patients with intralobar sequestration (see below). Grossly the sequestered segment of lung displays a thickened pleura with adhesions between mediastinal structures, the diaphragm, and/or parietal pleura. Cut section reveals a consolidated parenchyma that frequently contains a single or multiple cysts varying in size from a few millimeters to 5 cm or longer in diameter and filled with thin to viscid yellow-white fluid or gelatinous material ( Fig. 7.49) . Microscopically, chronic inflammation and fibrosis replace the normal pulmonary parenchyma (Fig. 7.50 ). The cysts noted grossly are lined by cuboidal, columnar, or, rarely, squamous epithelium and are filled with amorphous eosinophilic debris or foamy macrophages. Remnants of bronchi and bronchioles are surrounded by fibrous connective tissue infiltrated by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages. Lymphoid aggregates, some with germinal centers, may be present. Remnants of alveolar ducts and alveoli are present as cuboidal epithelial-lined structures amid loose-to-dense FIGURE 7.50. Intralobar pulmonary sequestration. A. Pulmonary parenchyma is distorted and largely replaced by dense fibrosis and chronic inflammation. Scattered bronchial-like structures lined by cuboidal-to-columnar epithelium are present. B. Irregular bronchiole-like structures are separated by fibrous connective tissue and alveolar-like structures that are heavily infiltrated by chronic inflammatory cells. connective tissue infiltrated by inflammatory cells. Foamy macrophages again may fill these structures. Elastic and muscular arteries may be noted within the interstitium, and show varying degrees of medial hypertrophy, thrombosis, arteritis, and, in older patients, atherosclerosis. The edge of the lesion may be sharply separated from the normal parenchyma by connective tissue or may blend diffusely with it, occasionally encompassing areas of normal parenchyma. Foci of acute bronchopneumonia Two patients, a 36-year-old woman and a 69-year-old man, developed squamous cell carcinoma within an intralobar sequestration. 367 Because of the presence of one or more systemic arteries to an intralobar sequestration, the lesion has long been considered to be a congenital malformation (Table  7 .5). Gebauer and Mason 368 in 1959, however, suggested that intralobar sequestration resulted from a "destructive bronchial pulmonary disease." In 1984, Stocker and Malczak 369 described the presence of normally occurring pulmonary ligament arteries in 90% of infants and children, and postulated that these arteries could be parasitized in the formation of an intralobar sequestration (Fig.  7.51 ). Under circumstances of bronchial obstruction and a chronic pneumonia with partial or complete interruption of the pulmonary artery supply to the infected portion, parasitization could occur through the development of a pleuritis and formation of a richly vascular granulation tissue deriving its blood supply from the hypertrophied pulmonary ligament arteries or, if the diaphragmatic surface of the lung is involved, the diaphragmatic vessels, that is, the phrenic arteries via the celiac axis ( Fig. 7.52) . With progression and resolution of the pneumonia, accentuated by recurring bouts of pneumonia, one or more systemic arteries assume a substantial supply to the chronically infected segment of lung. The lack of systemic arteries other than the bronchial arteries available for parasitization by a chronic upper-lobe pneumonia accounts for the rare occurrence of intralobar sequestration in the upper lobes (less than 2% and likely overreported because of their rarity). Chronic pneumonia of the upper lobes, histologically similar to intralobar sequestration, is not, however, an unusual occurrence. 8 with blue latex, dissection through the pulmonary ligament artery to the right lower lobe reveals a very small artery rising from the aorta (left) supplying the esophagus and ramifying in the pleura. c FIGURE 7.52. Sequence of events leading to formation of intralobar sequestration. A. Bronchial occlusion (by aspiration, inflammatory debris, etc.) leads to development of pneumonia distal to obstruction. Note small pulmonary ligament artery that is normally present. B. As pneumonia progresses, obstruction of pulmonary artery may occur, promoting hypertrophy of pulmo-Intralobar sequestration, as noted, is very unusual in infants, with the notable exception of bronchopulmonary foregut malformations and the rare case of pulmonary vascular malformation producing congestive heart failure, both clearly congenital lesions. This absence supports the theory of an acquired origin of this lesion. So also does the relative infrequency of associated anomalies (6% to 12 % )347 when compared with the anomalies seen in association with extralobar sequestration (49% to 67%), congenital pulmonary lymphangiectasis (85%), infantile lobar emphysema (42%), and congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (26% ). 63 In addition, the occurrence B IT. Stocker et a!. nary ligament artery as inflamed lung seeks oxygenated blood to aid in resolution of pneumonia. C. As pneumonia resolves, progresses, or recurs, involved segment of lung may derive its major arterial supply from single (or multiple) hypertrophied pulmonary ligament artery. (Modified from Stocker and MaIczak,369 with permission.) of intralobar sequestration in older patients with no evidence of previous lung disease, and the presence in the lesion of an unusual infectious process such as the formation of a mycetoma, further suggests the acquired nature of the lesion. 37°-372 Finally, the fact that intralobar sequestrations drain via the normal pulmonary veins in 95% of cases, and may be partially air containing, again suggests a fluctuating inflammatory process superimposed on a developmentally normal lung. It is possible, however, that some intralobar sequestrations develop in other preexisting malformations, such as congenital pulmonary airway malformation of a lower lobe, that become infected. 373 Pediatric lung transplantation is relatively uncommon; it accounts for about 5.4% of all lung transplants (57 of 1053 in year 2001), with heart-lung transplantation being extremely rare in the United States. 374 ,375 Thus, much of what we have learned about the pathology of lung transplantation comes from the experience in adults gained over the last two decades (see also Chapter 23) . The data accumulated from pediatric recipients indicates that the pathology of rejection is similar or identical to that in older patients. However, there are significant differences in primary diseases, size of the allograft, repeat hospitalization, recurrent disease, impact on growth and development, and mortality. 376 Eighty-five percent of pediatric recipients are between 11 and 17 years of age, with the nadir between 2 and 7 years of age. Among the younger aged pediatric recipients, the first year of life is the most likely time for lung transplantation. In the infant age group, congenital heart disease was the most common indication for lung transplantation, but thereafter the most common indication is cystic fibrosis (67% of adolescents). Other indications include pulmonary hypertension, interstitial fibrosis, and bronchiolitis obliterans. 375 The increasing scarcity of donor lungs, especially for pediatric recipients, has stimulated the developmen~ of downsizing techniques (split lung, lobar and periph,;ral segmental transplantation) of cadaveric lungs, which have proven to be reliable procedures providing equal results compared to standard lung transplantation. 377 In addition, living-donor lobar lung transplantation has also provided organs for patients considered too ill to await cadaveric transplantation, with at least comparable if not better survival. 378 ,379 Transbronchial biopsies are an integral part of the posttransplant monitoring for rejection or infection, and adequate lung tissue for histologic diagnosis can be obtained safely and effectively from pediatric patients of all ages via flexible bronchoscopy. 380 The histology of both acute and chronic lung rejection is similar to that seen in adults, and the 1996 Working Formulation for the Classification of Pulmonary Allograft Rejection is used for grading (see Chapter 23).381 Morbidity is common after pediatric lung transplantation, with these patients being at high risk for developing graft failure, adenoviral pneumonia and other infections, diabetes, hypertension, and bronchiolitis obliterans (BO). Bronchiolitis obliterans continues to be the leading cause of late morbidity and mortality, with only 45% of 5-year survivors being free of disease. 375 ,382 Because of the nature of indications for pediatric lung transplantation, recurrence of primary disease in the allograft is not an issue (in contrast to adults, e.g., sarcoidosis). 217 The outcome after pediatric lung transplantation has not improved significantly over the last 15 years, except for the trend toward increased survival in infants. Overall pediatric survival is 66% at 1 year,57% at 2 years, 48% at 3 years, and 31 % at 9 years. 374 ,383 