Poster presentations BARIATRIC SURGERY 22182 P020 INTUSSUSCEPTION COMPLICATING POST GASTRIC BYPASS PREGNANCY 22229 P022 SPLENIC UPPER POLE ISCHEMIA FOLLOWING SLEEVE GASTRECTOMY: FIRST CASE REPORT
? Springer, Science+business Media
Terive Duperier MD, New Dimensions Weight Loss Surgery, San Antonio, TX, Minimally Invasive Surgeons of Texas
Objective: Only 10 cases of intussusception after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery and 11 cases of intussusception complicating pregnancy have been reported in the literature with one previous case common to both groups. We present an unusual case of intussusception complicating pregnancy following open RYGB. Methods: 34-year-old female had a normal vaginal delivery at full term and on post-partum day one, she developed sudden onset of mid abdominal pain. On evaluation she had significant periumbilical tenderness but no peritoneal signs and an elevated white count. CT scan showed a large intussusception measuring 15 · 10 · 10 cm. Past surgical history significant for open RYGB five years earlier with subsequent 140-lb weight loss and normal previous pregnancies after gastric bypass. Results: The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy, lysis of adhesions, reduction of intussusception and resection of 180 cm of small bowel with end-to-side jejunojejunal anastomosis. Intraoperative findings included retrograde intussusception at the jejunojeunal anastomosis, with marked dilation of the Roux and biliopancreatic limb and a decompressed efferent limb. The incarcerated small intestine within the intussusception appeared to have ischemic injury. Intraoperative pathology of small bowel showed recent hemorrhage, mucosal ulceration, transmural edema and exudate formation, consistent with ischemic-related changes. Postoperative course was uneventful and the patient went home on the fourth postoperative day. Conclusion:Intussusception following RYGB and during pregnancy is a rare complication. Some studies have postulated abnormal motility to be a causative factor of retrograde intussusception in gastric bypass patients. Pregnancy following RYGB is speculated to cause intussusception due to altered anatomic relationships secondary to a growing uterus. The effect of pregnancy itself on intussusception needs to be further investigated with hormonal changes possibly playing a role. Operative revision and reversal represent treatment alternatives for patients who fail primary bariatric operations. This review focuses on a small group of patients who had reversal rather than revision of their primary operation. Methods: This study reviews 2532 primary and 238 revisional operations that were performed by one surgeon over a 27-year period. Primary operations were performed by other surgeons in 75 of the revision patients. The indications for revision were complications in 73 patients (31%) and weight loss failure in 165 patients (69%). Results: Ten patients had reversal rather than revision including 5 who requested reversal for severe outlet stenosis after banded restrictive procedures and 5 who were recommended to have reversal due to active abuse of prescription drugs (2) or tobacco (1) and 2 with severe metabolic complications related to malabsorption. Weight regain occurred in all but one patient who was followed for > 12 months. Two patients subsequently requested another bariatric operation after regaining weight, only one of which was performed with34% EWL post revision. One of the 10 patients had a post operative wound infection. There were no other complications or deaths in this subgroup. Conclusions: Approximately 1.0% of patients who have bariatric surgery will require reversal for troublesome complications. Active substance abuse and non-Compliance with physician?s recommendations contributed towards the decision to reverse rather than revise the primary operation. The learning curve for laparoscopic gastric bypass has been estimated at 100 cases. We compared data from the first 100 consecutive laparoscopic roux-en-y gastric bypasses (LRYGB) with the first 100 consecutive laparoscopic adjustable gastric bands (LAGB) in a minimally invasive fellowship-trained surgeon?s experience upon joining an established bariatric practice. Results: Patients undergoing LRYGB were slightly heavier (BMI 46.1 vs. 44.2, p < 0.05), younger (mean age 39y vs. 41y, p < 0.05), and equally likely to be men (22% vs. 23%, p = NS). LRYGB patients experienced greater weight loss at one year (85% EWL vs. 53% EWL, p < 0.001), but also had a higher complication rate (24% vs. 9%, p = 0.001). The majority of LRYGB complications were anastomotic strictures (17%) successfully treated with endoscopic dilation. Excluding endoscopic dilations, the 30-day re-operation rate was 0% for LRYGB and 3% for LAGB (p = 0.08), and the one-year reoperation rates were similar between the two groups (6% vs. 8%, p = NS). The 30-day mortality for both groups was zero. Conclusion: LRYGB and LAGB can both be performed safely and effectively during the learning curve in a high-volume bariatric practice with experienced associate surgeons. Fellowship training can reduce the learning curve for advanced laparoscopic procedures. Laparoscopic bariatric surgery has been performed at Wright Patterson Medical Center (WPMC) for two years. We hypothesize that laparoscopic RNY gastric bypass (LRNY) can be performed at a military medical center with equivalent outcomes to civilian programs at a lower cost. Methods: We reviewed all 96 LRNY cases performed from March 2006 to February 2008 at WPMC. We specifically examined excess weight loss at each postoperative visit, resolution of co-morbidities six months after surgery (hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia), and complications (operative mortality, pulmonary embolus (PE), leak rate, upper gastrointestinal bleed (UGIB), small bowel obstruction (SBO)). Our operative costs were compared to average TRICARE reimbursement for patients sent to an outside civilian provider when a surgeon was unavailable within our region. Results: Average excess weight loss at 12 months was 71.1%. Diabetes resolved in 68.2%, with a drop in HbA1c from 7.6 to 6 (p < 0.0001). Hypertension resolved in 52.8%. Hyperlipidemia resolved in 63.8% with a 42 mg/dL drop in total cholesterol (p < 0.0001), 100 mg/dL drop in triglycerides (p < 0.0001), and 26 mg/dL drop in LDL (p < 0.0001). Complications were minimal: operative mortality (0%), PE (0%), leak (1%), UGIB (2%), SBO (4%). In addition, the cost of performing laparoscopic gastric bypass at our facility was $2,069. Compared to the TRICARE payout of $7,064, this provides a cost savings of $4,495. Conclusions: LRNY gastric bypass performed at a major military medical center can achieve or exceed weight loss goals, result in significant resolution of co-morbid conditions and be done safely with minimal complications. There is a significant cost savings to taxpayers when weight loss surgery is performed at a military medical center by qualified surgeons. Introduction: One of the major complications of applying a prosthetic device to facilitate gastric partitioning has been intra-luminal erosion of the prosthesis. Removing an eroded gastric band is fraught with difficulty secondary to the extensive inflammatory response around the proximal stomach and left lobe of the liver. As a result, bariatric clinicians have attempted to apply endoscopic technology to facilitate removal of eroded gastric prostheses. Our study reports on our experience of applying endoscopic scissor transection to remove eroded gastric prostheses in a large tertiary care medical center. Methods: A Retrospective chart review was conducted to identify all adult(> 18) patients managed endoscopically for removal of eroded prosthesis post-bariatric surgery at the Baylor College of Medicine Comprehensive Bariatric Surgery Center and the University of Texas-Houston Bariatric Surgery Program. Results: Seven patients, mean BMI 40.5 +/)7.2, were managed endoscopically to remove eroded gastric prosthesis post vertical banded gastroplasty. All patients (7/ 7) reported symptoms consistent with a proximal gastric outlet obstruction and inadequate weight loss was reported by 71% (5/7). The mean time for endoscopic band removal was 26.8 +/)4.8 minutes. All eroded bands were evident at the end of the gastric pouch and were visualized with either a normal or retroflexed endoscopic view. All 7 patients were discharged the same day of their procedure. Mean follow up of the patients was 9.7 weeks(1 week-30 weeks). Three patients underwent revisional bariatric surgery following the band removal. Conclusions: Our study demonstrates that endoscopic scissor transaction is a safe and effective modality in removing eroded gastric prostheses after vertical banded gastroplasty. Furthermore, this technique avoids the pitfalls associated with removing the eroded bands surgically. It also allows the patient and surgeon to make an insightful decision regarding a revisional bariatric surgical procedure, without being contingent on addressing the eroded gastric band. The purpose of this study is to determine whether routine postoperative upper gastrointestinal fluoroscopy (UGI) is necessary after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB). LAGB has become an accepted procedure for weight loss surgery, particularly because of decreased operative time and fewer early perioperative complications. Many centers utilize UGI to ensure stomal patency and gastric integrity at the banding site. However, UGI increases the cost of the procedure and may increase length of stay due to exam availability. Methods: A prospective database of 200 LAGB cases performed by a single surgeon over three years was reviewed; follow up ranged from 4 months to 3 years. Patients with a difficult dissection underwent intraop instillation of dilute methylene blue (MB) per orogastric tube to diagnose gastric injury. All patients underwent UGI 2 to 24 hours after surgery, dependent on exam availability. Cases were reviewed for age, gender, BMI, comorbidities, operative time, MB usage, abnormal UGI results, and complications. Differences between those who received MB and those who did not were compared using Student?s T-test. Results: Mean age was 43; mean BMI was 45. Mean operative time was 44 minutes. Six percent underwent intraop MB test with no leaks identified; these patients were on average 5 years older (p < .05), with operative time 23 minutes longer (p < .01); differences in gender and BMI were not statistically significant. Forty-four percent of patients stayed overnight. All postop UGI results were normal. One patient (0.5%), who had a normal intraop MB test and normal postoperative UGI, returned within 2 days with a gastric perforation requiring band explant and gastric repair. Conclusion: Routine UGI after LAGB is not necessary, based on a 0% stomal obstruction rate and nondetection of a single gastric leak. Elimination of routine postoperative UGI will decrease cost and length of stay. We suggest a selective approach for those patients at increased risk of early postop complications, including those having intraoperative methylene blue instillation, increased length of operation, and increased age. To further improve cosmesis and perhaps reduce the disability associated with current laparoscopic operations single incision laparoscopic surgery has been advocated. Single incision laparoscopic surgery has been applied to cholecystectomy and appendectomy. We report on the application of this technique to adjustable gastric banding. Methods: Six patients with BMI of 41-44 underwent single incision laparoscopic band placement, one with associated hiatal hernia repair. The average size of the incision was 4 cm, placed in the umbilicus for 2 patients and in the right upper quadrant for the remainder. Within this incision, 4 ports were placed for camera, liver retractor and two working ports. Results: All 6 patients underwent uneventful single incision laparoscopic gastric banding, with 1 patient also having hiatal hernia repair. The average operative time was 94 minutes (range: 76 min to 129 min) similar to standard laparoscopic band placement with 5 ports. When hiatal hernia was repaired in addition to band placement, the operative time was 199 minutes. There were no intraoperative complications and all the patients were discharged on the same day of the surgery. When subjectively evaluated at 2-week follow up, most patients required minimal pain medications and were able to return to ADLs in the range of 4-7 days. All the patients were very satisfied with the cosmetic results of the single incision surgery. Conclusion: Single incision surgery laparoscopic gastric banding placement is a safe, feasible procedure that may potentially benefit patients with better cosmesis and perhaps less pain, and more rapid recovery. Objectives: Intra-gastric balloons are devices used in many foreign countries as a bridge to bariatric surgery. Regulatory oversight differs from country to country leading to inconsistency in patient evaluations and procedural techniques. Often a United States (US) physician?s first exposure to these devices is generally upon arrival of a patient presenting with device related sequelae. Presented is an option for endoscopic retrieval of such an intra-gastric balloon. Description: The patient presented with signs and symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction. Body habitus was within normal limits. CT scan showed an implanted gastric device containing fluid and air occupying the entire stomach. General anesthesia was required to perform an esophagogastroduodenoscopy using a dual channel scope. Alligator forceps were used to stabilize the device to allow for deflation. Multiple fenestrations with a biopsy needle were required. The device was removed using the forceps and a polyp snare. Of note is the fact that the recommended volume for these devices is 300 -700 cc, yet our patient?s balloon contained 2.5 liters of air/fluid. Results: The patient tolerated the procedure well and a post procedural barium swallow was negative for perforations. The patient experienced a full recovery. Conclusion: International institutions utilizing these devices have published a couple techniques for retrieval. The technique described here utilizes a standard US community hospital. Manufacturers of these balloons provide information to patients on countries and providers thus promoting medical tourism. With this trend, the chances for US physicians being confronted with complications increases. It is important that physicians not only be aware of such procedures and devices, but also be familiar with techniques to deal with the complications. Objective: Obesity is an epidemic in America and continues to worsen. Lifestyle modifications remain the first line in treatment, but typically fail for patients. As obesity worsens, the associated comorbidities become an expensive and time consuming aspect of our health care system. Placement of an adjustable gastric band in a low BMI population (< 35) allows for adequate weight loss to possibly avoid costly comorbidities. Methods: Patients with a BMI equal to or less than 35 were evaluated for laparoscopic placement of adjustable gastric bands. The patients underwent full psychiatric, nutritional, and medical evaluation prior to operation. Postoperatively the patients were followed by the surgical, medical, psychiatric and dietary teams for optimal results. After placment of the adjustable gastric band patients were followed for 6 months, thus far, and a retrospective chart review performed. Results: 31 patients (4 male, 27 female) with a BMI =/<35 underwent laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding. There were no intraoperative complications or conversion to an open procedure. . 18 of 31 patients have been followed for 6 months thus far. % excess weight loss at 1 month was 17.6% ()15% to 41%), 3 months was 21.9% ()35% to 55%), and at 6 months was 33.5% (9%-63%). There have been no post operative complications. Conclusions: There is no doubt that rising obesity represents a serious epidemic both internationally and nationally. As bariatric surgeons we must find ways to halt obesity before it results in serious comorbidities, and must do so in the safest way possible. We believe gastric banding to be a promising solution. In our low BMI population, the majority of the patients are showing encouraging weight loss in the first six months. Placing an adjustable gastric band in this population shows great success as many are able to exercise and are more apt to change dietary habits. At UC San Diego we believe this offers an exciting option for those typically excluded from obesity surgery before their weight results in serious health problems. Introduction: Between 20 to 40% of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients (T2DM) develops nephropathy. It is considered the most common cause of end-stage renal disease. The objective of this study is to evaluate the regression of nephropathy in patients with T2DM with BMI below 30 that were submitted to the laparoscopic ileal interposition associated to a sleeve gastrectomy (LII-SG). Methods: The procedure was performed in 72 patients. 51 were men and 21 women. Mean age was 52.8 years . Mean BMI was 26.7 kg/m2 (22.1 -29.4) . All patients had evidence of stable treatment with oral hypoglycemic agents and or insulin for at least 12 months. Insulin therapy was been used by 51.4 of the patients. Mean duration of T2DM was 10.5 years (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18) (19) (20) (21) (22) . Mean A1c was 8.5%. Microalbuminuria (30-299 lg/ min) was diagnosed in 40.3% of the patients and macroalbuminuria (> 300 lg/min) in 8.4%. The mean clearance of creatinine was 98.2 mL/min (45-111). 4.5% of the patients had creatinine clearance below 60 mL/min. Forty patients (55.5%) had arterial hypertension. Results: Mean post-operative follow-up was 24.5 months . Mean postoperative BMI was 21.2.kg/m2 (17 -26.7). Mean A1c was 6.1%, ranging 4.4 to 8.3. Overall, 91.4% of the patients achieved an adequate glycemic control (A1c < 7) without antidiabetic medication. A1c below 6 was achieved by 50%, 41.4% had A1c between 6 and 7 and 8.6% had A1c above 7. Microalbuminuria was normalized in 86.2% of the patients. Macroalbuminuria was no longer characterized. The mean clearance of creatinine was 116 mL/min, ranging from 58.6 to 145. Arterial hypertension was controlled in 90% of the patients. Conclusions: While the progression of diabetic nephropathy cannot be avoided, the LII-SG seems to be a promising procedure for the control of this disease and an effective operation for the regression of T2DM in a non-obese (BMI < 30) population. Background: Intragastric Balloon (IGB) is an alternative endoscopic procedure to achieve weight loss and improve obesity related co-morbidities. The impact of IGB in type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) after its removal is uncertain. Patients and Methods: 28 obese T2DM patients (20 female; mean age 43.5 ± 11.0 years, mean BW107.5 ± 24.5 kg; mean BMI 40.6 ± 9.3 kg/m2) underwent IGB were evaluated for improvement their glycemic control (fasting blood glucose FBG, HBA1c level, need of hypogycemic agents) after weight reduction in a multidisciplinary university referral center. Bioenterics Intragastric Balloon (BIB?) system was employed in the study. Remission of their T2DM defined as normalized FBG & HBA1c without need of any hypoglycemic agents. Results: Mean IGB treatment period was 164.5 ± 41.3 days and 2 patients (7.1%) required early removal (27 & 37 days) due to severe vomiting. Mean body-weight, BMI and %EBW loss were 11.3 ± 5.8 kg, 4.2 ± 2.2 kg/m2 and 37.5 ± 34.2 % immediate after removal of IGB. After IGB removal, their FBG (8.9 ± 2.2 vs. 6.8 ± 3.1 mmol/ l;p = 0.0005) and HBA1C level (7.5 ± 1.5 vs. 6.4 ± 1.8 %;p = 0.011) was significantly improved as compared before IGB placement and 10 of them (35.7%) achieved remission of their T2DM. Nine patients received second stage bariatric surgery (initial T2DM remission, n = 3) and further weight loss (weight loss 4.8 ± 10.9 kg) & BMI loss (1.8 ± 4.0 kg.m2) were observed at a median FU of 24 months, and one additional patient has T2DM remission. However, for those patients did not receive additional surgery (initial T2DM remission, n = 7), there were significant weight regain (4.2 ± 5.2 kg) at a median FU of 21.5 months. Their FBG (6.8 ± 3.6 vs. 8.8 ± 2.7 mmol/l;p = 0.019) and HBA1C level (7.0 ± 2.5 vs. 7.6 ± 1.9 %;p = 0.262) had worsen after IGB removal and only 3 out of 7 (42.8%) of them remain remission from their T2DM. Conclusion: Although IGB can achieve short term weight loss and improvement of T2DM status, this effect cannot sustain and surgery remains the most reliable procedure for glycemic control in obese diabetic patients. The effect of limb-length on weight loss after gastric bypass is controversial. Some studies have concluded longer bypasses increase weight loss while others have no effect of bypass length on weight loss. Review of the negative studies show generally small sample sizes and thus are likely to be at risk for a beta, type II error. The purpose of this study was to compare the effect of variable limb lengths in patient weight loss. Methods: 3,309 patients underwent Mini-Gastric Bypass and completed 1 year of follow up. Bypass limb length was modified based on starting weight. Results: Weight loss following surgery followed a logarithmic decline following surgery though the end of the first year and then leveled off ( fig. 1.) Weight loss was directly related to bypass limb length (fig 1.) As limb length increased mean weight loss at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months increased linearly. Linear regression model (y = mx + b) was y = 8.1 kilograms * x + 9.6 kilograms, (Regression Coefficient: r = 0.98) i.e. the model predicts an increase 7.7 kilograms for every additional foot of bowel bypassed. Introduction: The recent increase in primary bariatric surgery has been coupled with an increase in revisional bariatric surgery. While most revisional surgery is for inadequate weight loss, a small but significant number of malabsorptive complications require re-intervention. The requirement for revision is suggested by symptoms and signs of malabsorption and malnutrition. Multiple investigational studies are often performed in an attempt to determine the anatomy. The utility of such tests is examined. Methods: We describe our series of three patient with bariatric surgery-induced malabsorption who underwent pre-operative workup followed by surgical revision. Two of the patients had previously undergone Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and one had received a duodenal switch procedure. The initial operative record was reviewed and it was noted that all operating surgeons had intended to apply accepted limb length configurations. Preoperative investigations to determine the anatomy were attempted. Correlation of these investigations with surgical findings were investigated. Results: Clinical findings suggestive of malabsorption and malnutrition were identified in all patients. Biochemical hypoproteinemia was confirmed. Careful review of operative records, as well as multiple diagnostic methods, including small-bowel follow through contrast imaging, abdominal computed tomography scans and endoscopy provided no additional important information. Due to difficulties in identifying the enteroenterostomy anastomosis, the length of the common channel was not able to be determined. Though not helpful, these investigations did cause significant delay in scheduling for revisional surgery, with the time from initial surgery to appreciating the requirement for revisional surgery in all cases being more than 6 months. Conclusion: In the post-bariatric surgery patient, clinical findings suggestive of malnutrition are best managed by early revisional surgery. Repeated attempts at anatomic investigation are unhelpful. Galaxy Shah MD, Mark Choh MD, Heather Herren, Subhashini Ayloo MD, University Of Illinois, Chicago Introduction: It is a proven fact that the bariatric surgery is effective in the treatment of morbid obesity and as a consequence results in the improvement/resolution of obesity associated comorbidites. Yet health insurers have stringent guidelines for indication of bariatric surgery which includes multidisciplinary evaluation with different time lengths of mandatory medically supervised weight loss (MSWL). For reasons MSWL would result in patient education and in turn would lead to life-style changes quintessential for weight loss. The objective of our study is to evaluate the equivalence of weight loss between two major providers: HMO?s (MSWL ranging from 3 months to 18 months) and Medicaid and self pay group with one month of MSWL. Methods and Procedures: Single institution and single surgeon experience of minimally invasive rouxen-Y gastric bypass between 2006 and 2008 were retrospectively reviewed. Data were analyzed for patient demographics, payor type, change in Body Mass Index (BMI) at regular intervals of 1, 3, 6 and 12 months, and 90-day patient outcomes. T-test was performed to compare the decrease in BMI at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months between the two payor groups. Results: Analysis demonstrated in HMO group the patients were female 82%, mean age of 43 and mostly accounted by Caucasian patients 44.8%. In Medicaid and self pay the patients were female 100%, mean age of 37 and mostly accounted by African American patients 67.6%. The interval change in BMI at 1, 3, 6 and 12 months are tabulated as below Conclusions: Roux-en-Y gastric bypass resulted in good weight loss in both groups. The Medicaid group is predominantly accounted by woman and African-American patients. In short term follow up there is no significant difference in weight loss between the HMO and Medicaid group in spite of different time lengths of mandatory medically supervised weight loss. Long term follow-ups are required to modify the policies of health-insurers for indication of bariatric surgery. Introduction: Suture line complications can cause major morbidities and mortality after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass. Suture line buttresses have been used in an attempt to prevent these complications. This study was done to determine if the introduction of suture line buttressing to our practice has decreased our complication rate. Methods: After obtaining IRB approval, our database was queried for the following complications: leak, endoscopy, dilation, GI bleed, readmission, reoperation and thirty-day mortality. The incidence of these complications before and after the introduction of suture line buttressing was compared using chi-squared. Results: There were 2499 Roux-en-Y gastric bypasses. Two thousand two hundred thirty patients were operated on without buttressing, while buttresses were used in 269 cases. There were 5 deaths among patients without buttresses (0.2%) and 3 among patients with buttresses (1.1%); this difference was significant (p = 0.015). The incidence of complications in each group is shown in the table. Conclusion: The use of suture line buttresses is not associated with decreased suture line complications in this study. The power of this study is limited by smaller numbers of patients who received buttresses and the rarity of the events analyzed. The increased mortality is most likely a Type I error given that complications are not increased. Larger studies may identify differences, but such small gains may not be cost-effective. Introduction: Short term weight loss outcomes after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LGB) are not found in large numbers within the literature. This study establishes a weight loss curve that individual patients may be compared to at follow up visits. Methods: This study is a retrospective analysis of all patients receiving LGB from the initial inception of the procedure at Eisenhower Army Medical Center from September 2006-October 2008. Weight and data were collected from the patients? General Surgery Obesity Clinic charts and the Armed Forces Health Longitudinal Technology Application (AHLTA) system. Results: 76 patients (91% female) received LGB over this time period with a mean BMI of 42.5 ± 12.1 (Range 35.7-50.8). The average age was 42.5 ± 12.1 years. The mean excess body weight was 127.2 ± 28.0 lbs prior to surgery. Following LGB, the mean percentage of excess weight loss at 1 week was 11.5 ± 6.64%, at 1 month was 21.9 ± 8.28%, at 3 months was 40.8 ± 12.3%, at 6 months was 60.4 ± 27.8, and at 12 months was 63.24 ± 20.6%. The mean BMI at 1 week was 39.5 ± 4.49, at 1 month was 37.9 ± 4.42, at 3 months was 33.7 ± 4.62, at 6 months was 29.8 ± 5.86, and at 12 months was 28.72 ± 4.56. Conclusions: These results are comparable to published values of percent of excess weight loss at 3, 6, and 12 months. After adjusting for age and demographics, expected short term weight loss outcomes following LGB can be established. These values can be used to motivate patients during the first year and to help physicians track the early success of bariatric surgery. As long term outcome data is collected, comparison of successful short term weight loss may be compared to successful long term weight loss to determine correlation. Introduction: Adjustable gastric banding is one option for obese patients pursuing bariatric surgery, though not all insurance policies cover the procedure. Patients may pay out of pocket for bariatric procedures if they do not have insurance that covers the operation. There may be a difference in expectations and motivation between these two patient populations may leads to a difference in outcomes. Self-pay patients may have more motivation to lose weight due to the significant financial investment. Methods: Data was collected prospectively in a bariatric surgery database for all patients undergoing adjustable gastric banding at our institution. Excess weight loss was then compared at our institution at 6 months (n = 83) and 1 year (n = 41) using a paired student t-test. Minors were excluded from data analysis. Results: Age, gender, and ideal body weight were identical between groups. Actual body weight was higher in the insured group (262 lbs vs. 248 lbs). At one year follow-up, excess weight loss was 50.63% (range 26-79) for the insurance group versus 43.68% (range 12-78) for the self-pay group though this difference was not significant (p = 0.12). The difference was also not significant at 6 months (35% excess weight loss for the insured versus 30% self pay) Discussion: Method of payment for bariatric surgery did not result in a significant difference in short term weight loss following adjustable gastric banding. Though the insured group lost more weight, this group also had a higher initial weight. Further long-term data with a larger number of patients will be needed to determine if any significant difference between insurance coverage and outcomes. Introduction: Bariatric surgery has been shown to be an effective therapy that results in long term weight loss, resolution of co-morbidities and improved quality of life (QOL) . Most of these studies lack comparison with a non-operative group. We hypothesize that after one year, patients who undergo bariatric surgery will see significant weight loss, resolution of co-morbidities and improved QOL compared with morbidly obese patients who do not undergo surgery. Methods: We identified 166 patients (operative group) in our prospective bariatric database that had bariatric surgery (Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) [n = 141] or adjustable gastric band (AGB) [n = 25] ) with at least 1 year of complete follow-up. Thirty patients who were initially evaluated for bariatric surgery at least one year prior, but never had an operation (non-operative group), were contacted for follow-up. Demographics (age, gender), weight, BMI, co-morbidities (joint pain, hypertension, diabetes, GERD, hypertriglyceridemia, obstructive sleep apnea) and QOL (Obesity Adjustment Survey) were compared initially and at 1 year follow-up. Either ANOVA, t-test or Chi-Square was used for analysis. Significance was set at p < 0.05. This study was IRB approved. Results: There was no significant difference between the operative (OP) and nonoperative (NOP) groups for gender, pre-operative weight, BMI, co-morbidities and QOL. After 1 year, percent excess weight loss (EWL) was significantly different between RYGB, AGB and NOP groups (61% vs. 40% vs. 9.9%, p < 0.05). There was significant resolution in all co-morbidities and improvement in QOL in the OP group compared to the NOP group, but no significant difference between RYGB and AGB groups for these outcomes. Conclusions: Over a one year period, we observed significant weight loss, resolution of co-morbidities and improved QOL in patients who underwent bariatric surgery compared to a group of morbidly obese patients who did not undergo surgery. Although RYGB provided statistically significant greater weight loss compared to AGB, the improvements in co-morbidities and QOL were similar between RYGB and AGB. These findings confirm that both RYGB and AGB are effective weight-loss therapies that improve co-morbidities and QOL compared to non-surgical management. LSG is increasingly performed among surgeons as a sole bariatric procedure. The aim of this study was to describe the results of Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy (LSG) on the first 536 patients performed in our institution as a definitive procedure METHODS AND PATIENTS: We conducted a review of our prospective electronic database for patients who underwent LSG as a sole bariatric procedure from August 2005 to September 2008. We assessed surgical results, complications, weight progression and resolution of co-morbid conditions. Results: In this period, 536 patients underwent LSG (77.8% females). Mean age was 36.7 ± 11.6 years. Mean preoperative BMI was 36.1 ± 5.8 kg/m2 (28.7-60.5). Mean operatory time was 76.8 ± 28.3 minutes. There were no conversions to open surgery. Mean hospital stay was 2.8 ± 0.8 days. Thirteen patients (2.4%) had early complications: 4 portal vein thrombosis (0.7%), 3 wound infections (0.6%), 2 leaks (0.3%), 2 hemoperitoneum (0.3%), 1 antral stenosis and 1 acute pancreatitis. No mortality was observed. Three patients required reoperation (2 leaks and antral stenosis). Seventeen patients (3.2%) developed late complications mainly due to cholelitiasis (6) and gastroesophageal reflux (3). Median follow up time was 12 months (1-36). Percent excess weight loss at 6, 12 and 24 months was 80.1 ± 24.9%, 88.3 ± 29.2% and 88.5 ± 33%. Preoperative comorbidities were dyslipidemia (DLP) 66%, type 2 diabetes (T2D) 6%, insuline resistance (IR) 54% and arterial hypertension (HTN)20%. Resolution or improvement of comorbidities at follow-up was 64% for DLP, 88% for T2D, 94% for IR and 73% for HTN. Conclusions: LSG proved to be effective and safe. Complication rate is low, however a high incidence of portal vein thrombosis needs to be carefully studied. Background: Three commonly used techniques to construct the gastrojejunostomy in a laparoscopic gastric bypass are the circular stapler, the linear stapler, and hand-sewn. The purpose of this study is to evaluate the difference in complications between these three techniques. Methods: This is a multi-institutional, retrospective study of all consecutive patients that had a laparoscopic Roux-en Y gastric bypass at the foundation of a bariatric program beginning in December 4, 2004 to August 23, 2007 . Surgical technique consisted of a single-layer hand-sewn anastomosis, a linear stapler reinforced with a hand-sewn second layer, and a 25 mm circular stapler. Complications that were studied included death, leak, hemorrhage, stricture, intraabdominal collection, wound infection, and marginal ulceration. Information was obtained through the center?s database and electronic chart review. Results: A total of 243 patients were operated on. 4 patients died for a total death rate of 1.6%. Of the 243 patients, 179 (73.7%) followed up 1 year or greater. Of these, 58 (32.4%) had a hand-sewn anastomosis, 96 (53.6%) had a linear stapler anastomosis, and 25 (14%) had a circular stapler anastomosis. There were a total of 3 leaks (1.7%), one in each group, 20 (11.2%) strictures, and 17 (9.5%) marginal ulcers. No statistically significant difference was reached in any of the groups, however there was a decrease trend in marginal ulceration and strictures in the circular stapler [1(4%) and 1(4%), p value 0.5 and 0.43] group compared to the hand-sewn and linear stapler groups [ 6(10.3%), 10(10.4%) and 8(13.8%), 11(11.5%) ]. Conclusion: There is a clinical trend towards decreased marginal ulcer and stricture formation in the circular stapler group compared to the hand-sewn and linear stapler group although statistical significance was not reached. Introduction: Weight regain after bariatric surgery is a controversial issue. Some authors argue that this happens because of dilated gastric pouch, others because limb length, hormonal reasons etc. Concerning gastric volume, several procedures have been described to measure this volume. Three dimension CT scan is a reproductible and effective procedure to measure gastric volume. Objective: The objective of this study is to check if CT scan is an effective and reproductible way to measure the gastric volume. Material and methods: First of all we choose ten patients operated of gastric bypass in our centre. We performed three CT scans to every patient and we compared the different volumes that we got in every scan by a correlation statistic analysis. After we concluded that the CT scan is a reproductible and effective way to measure gastric volume, we measured the volume of the pouch in the operating room (with a balloon) in two patients and we performed a CT scan getting similar results. Results: When we performed the analysis, we got excellent correlation results of the different measures with a sample concordance correlation coefficient (&#961;c) = 0.8857 Concussions: CT scan is an effective and reproductible way to measure gastric pouch?s volume in patients with gastric bypass. Introduction: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy has been shown to be a safe and effective primary weight loss procedure. With increasing international experience, more bariatric surgery centers are starting to offer sleeve gastrectomy. Our hypothesis is that laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as part of a multidisciplinary weight loss program can be safely introduced with acceptable short term results. Methods: The first 21 consecutive patients undergoing laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy at our center between Dec 2007 and Sept 2008 were reviewed. All sleeves were constructed over a 42 F bougie. Staple buttress material was not used and staple lines were selectively oversewn. Results: The 21 patients included 19 females with a mean age of 39.3 years. The mean preoperative body mass index was 50.8 kg/m2 (range 41.0 to 75.1). Mean operative time was 143.9 minutes (range 75-275); all procedures were completed laparoscopically. Mean length of stay was 3.2 days (range 2-5). There were no perioperative mortalities or major complications. No patients required blood transfusions or had staple line leaks. One patient had a compression neuropathy of the gluteal region. One patient was found in a follow up visit to have a pulmonary embolism. Mean follow-up was 3.6 months, ranging from 1 to 10 months. Weight loss outcomes are shown in the table below. Absolute and excess weight loss after lapar oscopic sleeve gastrectomy Conclusion: Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy as part of a multidisciplinary weight loss program can be safely introduced with acceptable short term results. Of those, 39 were selected for this study for presenting BMI < 30. RESULTS: All balloons were placed and retrieved by office endoscopy, safely and effectively in all the cases. General anesthesia was not needed. All the patients left the outpatient clinic in less than 1 hour. The patients mean age was 41.6 (16-67) years-old, initial weights and BMI were 76.4 ± 9.9 (58.0-100.2) kg and 27.8 ± 1.6 (22.8-29.9) kg /m 2 . For the 21 patients who had completed the 6-month treatment, the results in weight loss and final BMI were 9.6 ± 4.2 (19.7-0.4) kg and 24.9 ± 1.7 (21.9-27.8) kg /m 2 . Five patients (12.8%) had episodes of severe vomiting and opted to stop the treatment. One patient (2.6%) had insufficient weight loss. 58.9% of the patients complained of nausea in the first days of treatment. One balloon spontaneously deflated during the treatment and was removed uneventfully by office endoscopy. CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary data suggest that the SIB procedure is a safe and effective alternative to the medical treatment of weight control in non obese patients with appropriate indication of use. BACKGROUND: Intragastric balloon treatment for obesity has been developed and its placement and removal techniques has been improved. Its primary objective is the treatment of obese people, who have had unsatisfactory results in their clinical treatment for obesity, despite of being cared for by a multidisciplinary team, and to prepare super obese patients with a higher surgical risk to a bariatric procedure. PACIENT AND METHODS: A 45 years-old obese male patient, who was going to be submitted to a heart transplant. With a high surgical risk, the patient presented before the balloon placement 102 Kg weight, BMI 35 (obesity grade 2), Excess Weight 28.8%. A new silicone Intragastric Balloon (SIB) was developed (SILIMED?). The procedure was carried out by attaching the SIB covering to the end of the endoscope with a polypectomy snare and inserting it under direct vision in the stomach fundus. The SIB was filled with 800 ml of a saline solution containing iodine contrast (20 ml) and methylene blue 2% (10 ml). Retrieval was made by positioning a double silicone overtube in the patient?s esophagus. SIB was perforated, and a catheter was inserted, draining the solution. The empty SIB was retracted by a near and inserted into the overtube and both were removed together, avoiding aspiration. RESULTS: The SIB was placed and removed without any complications. Nausea and vomiting occurred in the first 2 days after the placement. The patient lost 16Kg and became more suitable for the heart transplant, being actually in the waiting list. CONCLUSION: These novel techniques have made SIB placement and removal an office procedure, which is fast, safe, and cost-effective and it can also be useful to prepare obese patients for major surgeries -a heart transplant. .5 kg; ± 21.9) underwent treatment for obesity using 138 SIBs. All SIBs were successfully placed and retrieved by way of office endoscopy under normal sedation. General anesthesia was not necessary, thereby greatly decreasing the risks and costs. For this purpose, a new Silicone Intragastric Balloon was developed (SILIMED ?). Placement was carried out by attaching the SIB with a polypectomy snare and inserting it under direct vision. The SIBs were released at the stomach fundus and filled with a solution of saline, iodine contrast and methylene blue (470-850 ml). Retrieval was performed by positioning an overtube in the patients? esophagus. A hole was made in the SIB using a needle and a catheter was inserted. The entire contents of the balloon were suctioned completely. A snare was used to retract the empty SIB. The SIB was partially inserted into the overtube and both were removed together. RESULTS: All balloons were satisfactorily placed. Of the 138 balloons, 80 have since been removed, 10 because of intolerance, 6 through balloon perforation, and 64 at the end of the 6-month course of treatment. All patients left the office within one hour after the insertion or removal procedures, and were satisfied with the procedure and the sedation. The day after SIB placement, 28 patients needed to stay in hospital for 12-48 hours, to control nausea and vomiting. The average weight loss among the 64 patients who finished the 6-month course of treatment was 11.3 (± 6.2) kg, and the average excessive weight loss (EWL%) was 55.1 (± 68.5) %. CONCLUSION: These novel techniques have made SIB placement and removal an office procedure, which is fast, safe, and cost-effective. Background: Recent studies document EWL > 50% for the laparoscopic adjustable gastric band (LAGB). This study reviews the LAGB experience at an urban academic center regarding complications, re-operative rate, and co-morbidities. Methods: 146 consecutive patients undergoing LAGB from August 2005 to December 2007 were reviewed. Pre and postoperative data were collected including weight, BMI, EWL, co-morbidities, and complications. Multiple patient demographics were analyzed using a t-test. Results: There were 139 women and 18 men with a mean weight of 127.2 kg ± 20.7 kg and BMI of 45.6 ± 6.2. The mean EWL was 20% ± 14% at 6 months (n = 118), 26% ± 15% at 12 months (n = 99), 27 % ± 18% at 18 months (n = 56), and 34% ± 24% at 24 months (n = 37). Complications were seen in 6.2% (n = 9) including port flipping, stoma obstruction, tube disconnection, port infections, and band slippage. Re-operation was required in 8 of these patients. Co-morbidities resolved in only 23% of patients. So far 4.8% (n = 7) of patients required revision to sleeve gastrectomy for inadequate EWL. At 12 months, only 6 (6.1%) patients achieved > 50% EWL. Also, > 50% EWL was achieved in 1 (2.6%) patient over 45 years old and in 1 (2.1%) African-American patient. Overall, %EWL was significantly greater in Caucasians (p = 0.022) Conclusion: Following LAGB, a majority of patients failed to achieve a 50% EWL and 10.3% required re-operation. Our data shows that patients older than 45 years and African Americans may not benefit from LAGB. Introduction: Internationally, operative procedures performed for weight loss differ in type based upon local socioeconomic conditions. The purpose of this study was to examine the practice patterns for bariatric surgeons at a hospital in Cuenca, Ecuador and in Nashville, TN at a major tertiary care institution.  Oscar A Garcia MD, J Andres Astudillo MD, Raffatt Jaber MD, Angel J Tamez MD, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Department of Surgery Introduction: The incidence of morbid obesity in the United States is increasing. Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass is a surgical treatment for morbid obesity resulting in weight loss and control or resolution of obesity-related co-morbidities, however, is not without complications. More common post-surgical complications include anastamotic leaks or strictures, bowel obstruction or vitamin/mineral deficiency. While relatively rare, marginal ulceration, gastro-gastric and gastro-cutaneous fistulae have been reported. This is a case report of a patient that developed a gastro-colonic fistula. Case report: This patient is a 34 year old female with a remote history of an open Roux-en-Y Gastric bypass with subsequent marginal ulcer and gastric pouch disruption requiring two revisions, and an incisional hernia requiring repair. She presented with weight loss, p.o. intolerance, diarrhea and abdominal pain for several months. Preoperative workup with contrast swallow, esophago-gastroduodenoscopy (EGD), colonoscopy and computed tomography (CT) revealed a gastro-colonic fistula. The fistula and malnutrition were managed preoperatively withholding oral intake and starting total parenteral nutrition (TPN). During exploratory laparotomy, a fistula was identified between the gastrojejunal anastamotic site and proximal transverse colon. Treatment included excision of the fistula with repair of the gastrojejunostomy and an extended right hemicolectomy. A postoperative swallow study revealed no leak at the repair site. During the postoperative course an intra-abdominal fluid collection was identified and drained percutaneously. The patient also had a prolonged ileus. Currently the patient is improving with complete resolution of presenting symptoms, weight gain and p.o. tolerance. Conclusion Fistula development as a complication after Gastric Bypass can be catastrophic. Gastro-colonic fistula is a rare complication and to our knowledge this is the first case report of a Gastro-Colonic fistula after this type of procedure. This should be considered in the differential diagnosis when a patient presents with PO intolerance, diarrhea and malnutrition after gastric bypass surgery. Andrew A Wheeler MD, Brent W Miedema MD, Roger A de la Torre MD, University of Missouri, Columbia, Mo Introduction: Enteral access for nutritional support after gastric bypass is a challenging problem due to dense postoperative adhesions, difficulty in gaining endoscopic access to the excluded stomach, and the thick abdominal wall in an obese patient. Open techniques can be technically difficult and associated with high morbidity. We present our novel laparoscopic technique for feeding tube placement in the excluded stomach after bariatric surgery. Methods: After trocar placement and adhesiolysis, an ultrasonic dissector was used to create a gastrotomy along the lesser curve. An 18 gauge needle was placed percutaneously in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen and inserted in the anterior remnant stomach near the greater curvature. A guide wire was passed through the introducer needle into the stomach lumen. The wire was grasped with an atraumatic grasper inserted into the gastrotomy and the wire was removed through a right sided 10 mm port. A push technique was then used to advance the gastrostomy tube over the wire, through the gastrotomy and out through the left abdominal wall. Moderate tension was placed on the bulb at the distal end of the gastrostomy tube and the tube was secured to the abdominal wall. The gastrotomy was then closed with a running silk suture and all ports were removed. Results: Patient data is shown in the table below. Patient 3 also had an omental patch of a staple line leak. There were no complications. Conclusion: We describe our experience with a novel technique for obtaining enteral access in patients after gastric bypass when other standard techniques for placing enteral feeding tubes are difficult or impossible. Introduction: Patients utilize the Internet to obtain information regarding bariatric surgery. The quality of this available information is inconsistent. Specifically, many patients browse video sharing websites to further educate themselves about the procedures. This study tested the hypothesis that a common video sharing website would provide high quality information for bariatric surgery patients. Methods: The most common video sharing website (Youtube) was browsed with the term ?laparoscopic bariatric surgery?. The first page of videos were all explored and graded by laparoscopic bariatric surgeon. The following metrics (via a Likert scale of 1 -10) were measured: patient friendliness, educational value, and relevance (higher number = higher level). Bias and current information were graded as yes or no. Entity whom submitted video, description of video, and advertising was also recorded. Results: The term ?laparoscopic bariatric surgery? yielded 11,600 videos. The first page revealed 20 videos. The mean relevancy was high (9) but the patient friendliness and education level value were both relatively low (6) and 30% had some type of bias. The average time from submission to current date was 419 days; yet 80% had current information. The list of entities that submitted the videos included third party website (7), surgeon (5), hospital/university (3), webcasting company (3), patient (1), and unknown (1). The descriptions included Video of procedure (6), webcast advertising (3), program advertising (2), university series (2), procedure description (2), dietary education (2), patient testimonial (2), and National Society lecture. There was obvious advertising for the surgeon (16), practice (12), website (6), webcast (3), bariatric industry (2), and non-bariatric industry (1). Conclusions: The most common video sharing website yielded a great amount of videos concerning laparoscopic bariatric surgery. Unfortunately, the average video had low value in terms of patient friendliness and educational level. Bariatric surgery practices must understand that many patients who have researched laparoscopic bariatric surgery may have done so with low quality information. Introduction: Alteration of normal anatomy with Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) makes it difficult to access common bile duct (CBD) in cases of choledocholithiasis. We present our experience in management of choledocholithiasis after RYGB. The purpose of the study was to develop the management algorithm of choledocholithiasis in patients after RYGB. Methods and Procedures: Retrospective review of patients who underwent treatment of CBD stones after RYGB was performed. Procedures used include: laparoscopic CBD exploration (LCBDE), ERCP using double balloon endoscopy (ERCP with DBE), ERCP through the remnant stomach (RS). Results: We divided the patients into 2 groups: with gallbladder (GB) and without the GB. We had 3 pts in the first group. First pt underwent lap chole with LCBDE and successful stone removal. Second pt had failed LCBDE due to impacted stone, ERCP through RS was successful with dilatation of the ampulla. Third pt had acute cholecystitis, procedure was converted to open due to extensive inflammation; CBD stone was managed also by ERCP through RS. One pt in the second group had primary CBD stone. ERCP using DBE failed and the stone was managed using ERCP through RS and laser lithotripsy. Introduction: Presence of hiatal hernia (HH) in patients undergoing laparoscopic adjustable gastric band (LAGB) placement may pose technical difficulties and predispose to postoperative GERD and a higher risk of band prolapse. We reviewed our experience with LAGB and concurrent HH repair. Methods: Retrospective chart review of all patients who underwent LAGB and prospective interview of patients with concurrent HH repair. GERD symptoms were evaluated with GERD-HRQL questionnaire. All cases were performed laparoscopically using pars flaccida technique. Hiatal hernias were routinely repaired anteriorly. Correlation between weight loss and GERD score was evaluated by Pearson correlation test. Results: 421 patients underwent LAGB from 2005-2008. The mean weight and BMI were 283.4 lbs and 47.1 kg/m2 respectively. Median follow-up was 9.8 months. Of the 403 patients with preoperative UGI data available, 119 patients (30%) had radiographic evidence of HH. 211 patients (52%) underwent HH repair at the time of LAGB. 19 patients with positive UGI did not undergo HH repair due to inability to identify a hernia or technical reasons. Two patients underwent posterior crural repair due to the large size of the hernia. The sensitivity and specificity of UGI in identifying HH was 45% and 96% respectively. We evaluated GERD symptoms on 127/211 patients (60%) who underwent HH repair; 76% of patients reported scores 0-5, 11% scores 6-10 and 13% scores > 10. There was no correlation between GERD-HRQL score and postoperative weight loss. Two patients developed anterior band prolapse, one of which had prior HH repair. 64/211 patients (30%) with HH repair underwent UGI study at a median time of 12.2 months postoperatively; 7.8% were diagnosed with a small recurrent HH. Conclusion: Preoperative UGI is not a sensitive test for identifying HH in the majority of patients undergoing LAGB. We advocate routine inspection of the hiatus and repair of HH during LAGB. This approach effectively controls GERD symptoms and may improve long term LAGB tolerance. INTRODUCTION -Diagnosis and management of silastic band malfunction after gastric bypass in the referred patient is the focus of this paper. The use of prosthetic material to reinforce the gastric outlet created during open bariatric surgery has seen many iterations. These ?bands? are intended to prevent dilation of this ostomy in an attempt to optimize and maintain desired weight-loss. Band erosion, displacement, or mechanical failure may result in pain, bleeding, weight regain, dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, or frank gastric outlet obstruction. Surgeons may be confronted by seemingly complex problems in bariatric patients with unclear or unknown operative history given our country?s mobile population. Methods: We provide information regarding the workup, treatment and subsequent follow-up of three patients who presented to our tertiary care medical center over a three month period in the Summer of 2008. Each of these patients had undergone an open bariatric procedure at an outside facility. The first patient presented to our clinic for extraction of a ?retained perigastric foreign body or drain? discovered on an outside CT scan performed to evaluate abdominal pain. An eroded band was extracted via endoscopy and the patient was discharged the following morning. Her symptoms resolved and she was tolerating solid food upon follow-up. The second patient presented with persistent nausea and vomiting. Gastric outlet obstruction was established by barium swallow. An obstructing silastic band was divided and removed laparoscopically with intraoperative endoscopic observation. The patient was discharged the following morning and was tolerating food well upon follow-up. The third patient presented complaining of dysphagia and intolerance of solid food. Outside endoscopy revealed stenosis of the gastrojejunostomy with a visible foreign body eroding into the lumen of her gastric pouch. A silastic band was extracted endoscopically with balloon dilation of her gastrojejunostomy stenosis. She was discharged the next morning, and her symptoms were resolved at follow-up. Conclusions: -We present a series detailing a simple yet effective solution to a complication of banded gastric bypass. Each of the patients in this series had complete resolution of their symptoms as a result of minimally invasive band extraction. Representative imaging is provided and the pertinent literature is reviewed as an aid to surgeons confronted with this clinical problem. Objective: Laparo-endoscopic single site (LESS) surgery for cholecystectomy and appendectomy have been described in the literature. However, the benefits of these procedures to traditional laparoscopic approaches has yet to be determined. To date, LESS surgery for placement of an adjustable gastric band has not been published or documented. Our goal is to determine the safety and feasibility of LESS surgery for placement of an adjustable gastric band. Methods: From December 2007 to June 2008, LESS surgery to place an adjustable gastric band was performed on 10 patients under IRB approval via a transumbilical incision. Essentially, multiple ports are placed through a single incision in the umbilicus to allow for liver retraction, visualization, and working instruments. All critical steps using a standard pars flaccida technique were not altered. Results: 10 patients were carefully selected including 9 women and 1 man ranging in age from 32 to 61 with a mean age of 47, mean BMI of 42, ranging 35-45. Patients were selected for the absence of hepatomegaly, absence of central obesity, and super-obese patients were not considered for inclusion. The mean operative time was 1 h and 10 min with a range of 53 min to 1 h and 48 min. All patients were discharged home within the 23 hour admission and there were no perioperative complications noted. In addition there were no wound related complications. Of note only 2 of 10 patients required the use of narcotic analgesia after discharge from the recovery room. There were no intraoperative or postoperative complications. Conclusions: In our experience LESS surgery for adjustable gastric band shows this technique to be both feasible and safe. Although technical limitations exist which will be improved upon, further studies need to be performed to compare LESS surgery for placement of adjustable gastric band to traditional laparoscopic techniques. Introduction: Usage of opioids for pain management in bariatric surgery patients requires special attention. Administration of narcotics to the obese patient carries the risk of respiratory suppression both due to the opioids and redistribution of the anaesthetics from the adipose tissue. We would like to share our experience in nasal administration of ketamine for post operative pain management following gastric bypass. Materials and Methods: 33 (28 Laparoscopic Gastric Bypass, 5 Laparoscopic Sleeve Gastrectomy) Patients were included in the study. Total Intravenous Anesthesia (Propofol Remifentanyl) was the preferred method of anesthesia. 10 mg?s of ketamine was administered to every patient intravenously after the cessation anestetics, prior to removal of trocars. A metered nasal spray delivering 2.5 mg?s of ketamine was utilized to administer 10 mg?s of ketamine (first dose) by the onset of pain and 10 mg?s every 3 hours. Results: The ketamine spray was effective in pain control with the onset of analgesic effect 2-3 minutes following nasal administration. No changes in oxygen saturation were seen, the patients did not experience hallucinations, and postoperative mobilization was effectively carried out every 4 hours. Only 1 patient required opiods despite nasal ketamine administration. Conclusion: Although our series are small and our results to be confirmed by other researchers, there are increasing numbers of papers on the analgesic properties and augmenting effects of ketamine on other analgesics. We believe that ketamine may be an effective and safe way of controlling postoperative pain in the morbidly obese patient. Introduction: The ideal procedure for the treatment of morbid obesity should be safe across a broad range of patients with equivalent weight loss results as the current standard, the Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (LGB). Since its introduction, the Laparoscopic Vertical Sleeve Gastrectomy (LVG) has increased in popularity for the primary treatment of morbid obesity. The benefits of the LVG include a low complication rate, the avoidance of foreign material, maintenance of normal gastro-intestinal continuity, the absence of malabsorption and the ability to convert to multiple other operations for weight loss failure or recidivism. We reviewed our experience with both the LGB and LVG for patients with a BMI < 50. Methods: In August of 2005, a comprehensive bariatric surgery program was established at Naval Medical Center San Diego. LGB and LVG were both offered as primary treatment of morbid obesity. LGB was performed in an antecolic, antegastric fashion with a lesser curve based, rectangular gastric pouch. LVG was performed through linear stapling of the gastric fundus along a 32Fr orogastric tube placed against the lesser curve. We performed a prospective secondary analysis of an existing database with IRB approval. Results: There were no statistical differences in preoperative patient characteristics or postoperative weight loss results. The only significant differences were the decreased operative time and length of stay in favor of LVG. Conclusion: LVG is the new procedure of choice for the treatment of morbid obesity with a BMI < 50. Introduction: Exercise is thought to improve functional outcomes and weight loss. As little as thirty minutes of brisk exercise daily can increase weekly metabolic caloric expenditure to about 35000 Kcal. This study is designed to measure change in preoperative exercise activity and functional health status, and subsequent postoperative physical activity in bariatric surgical patients. Methods and Procedures: 41 patients, who were candidates for weight loss surgery, were prospectively randomized. Patients in the intervention group were contacted weekly and encouraged to exercise. Patients in the standard group were contacted regularly and no extra effort was made to ensure they were exercising. Patient activity was recorded using an accelerometer (Actical, Respironics, Inc) that was worn continuously for seven days prior to each data point. Data was recorded at baseline, 30 days after starting the exercise regimen and prior to the operation, and 8 weeks after the operation. Patients? functional health status was recorded at each endpoint using the Short Form 36 Health Survey. Results: Intervention group (n = 25) and the control group (n = 16) underwent testing. 32% (13/41) patients dropped out because they did not exercise at all or refused to wear the accelerometer. At baseline the intervention group had an average total energy expenditure (AEE) of 37143 (± 5759) Kcal while the control group?s average was 31666 (± 9522) Kcal. After 30 days of exercise, the intervention group?s AEE was 34385 (± 1386) Kcal while the control group?s average was 33625 (± 9895) Kcal (p = 0.50). Weight loss was noted in both groups prior to the operation: study group (3.10 ± 4.66 lbs) and control group (6.39 ± 8.03 lbs). Postoperatively the study group experienced a weight loss of 35.00 lbs ± 12.72 and the control group of 56.90 lbs ± 46.95. Conclusions: Patients, receptive to exercise, were able to maintain an average energy expenditure equivalent to a brisk walk. This may lead to significant clinical weight loss in the perioperative period. Verbal encouragement alone did not increase activity and augment energy expenditure. Introduction: Significant weight regain after gastric bypass can occur over time due to dilatation of the gastric pouch and stoma. Endoluminal approaches for gastric pouch reduction are currently under investigation. EndoFLIP? (Crospon Ltd., Dangan, Galway, Ireland) is an endoscopic functional imaging probe designed to accurately measure intraluminal volume and wall compliance. Our objective was to utilize EndoFLIP? technology to accurately document gastric pouch reduction and wall compliance in an ex vivo porcine model. Methods: An explanted porcine stomach was used to create an ex vivo model of a dilated gastric pouch and stoma. Gastric pouch volume was measured using an EndoFLIP? functional lumen imaging probe. Endoluminal gastric pouch reduction was then performed with a StomaphyX? device using ten tissue fasteners. EndoFLIP? was used to calculate post-reduction gastric pouch volume and wall compliance. Results: The porcine ex vivo gastric pouch had an intraluminal volume of 31.4 mL at 0 mmHg of wall tension. Following the StomaphyX? procedure, the reduced gastric pouch had a volume of 9.8 mL at 0 mmHg of wall tension, and 12.3 mL at 2 mmHg of wall tesion. EndoFLIP? demonstrated a reduction in gastric pouch volume of 21.6 mL and a wall compliance of 1.25 mL/mmHg (0.00092 L/cmH2O). Conclusions: EndoFLIP? is a novel device for measuring intraluminal volume and wall compliance. We report the first use of EndoFLIP? technology to accurately document a reduction in gastric pouch volume and measurement of pouch wall compliance. Further studies with this technology are ongoing and may elucidate the relationship between gastric pouch reduction and weight loss following gastric bypass surgery. The extravasation of milky chyle into the peritoneal cavity is known as Chylous ascites. A true chylous effusion is defined as the presence of ascitic fluid with high fat (triglyceride) content, usually higher than 110 mg/Dl. This can occur de novo as a result of trauma, neoplasm, obstruction of the lymphatic system as well as many other causes that have been described in the literature. It can also occur as a secondary event, this is when an existing clear ascitic fluid turns chylous. Laparoscopic Roux Y Gastric Bypass (LRYGB) has assumed a central role in the surgical treatment of obesity; we present a case of chylous ascites following a Laparoscopic Roux Y Gastric Bypass (LRYGB). Case presentation: We report a case of Chyloperitoneum fallowing a Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (LRYGB) with 100 cm alimentary and 50 cm biliopancreatic limb in a 40 year old male patient who was admitted for surgery on May 31, 2007. The procedure was performed without apparent complications. On August 2008, an Abdominal CT with contrast was ordered, it showed ascites at the level of the liver, spleen, and right paracolic gutter as well as mesenteric adenitis. On September 2008, the patient is admitted to Cleveland Clinic Florida due to a chronic abdominal pain of unknown etiology. The patient is schedule for an elective diagnostic laparoscopy and possible reduction of internal hernia and closure of a mesenteric defect. Upon inspection of the abdominal cavity, it came to our attention that there was a large amount of chylous fluid accumulating in the right upper quadrant (RUQ), cul-de-sac and left upper quadrant (LUQ), a specimen was sent for microscopic analysis which came back negative for any bacteria. The loops of small bowel showed signs of lymphectasia, in addition an internal herniation of the common channel was also found. The patient made an uneventful recovery after surgery. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of chylous ascites following a Laparoscopic Roux Y Gastric Bypass (LRYGB). Conclusion Chylouperitoneum should be considered as a possible cause of ascites in patients with chronic small bowel obstruction following a Laparoscopic Roux Y Gastric Bypass (LRYGB). Background: Stenosis, ulceration and dilatation at the gastrojejunostomy (GJ) are recognized complications after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGBP). Treatment options for GJ complications include in most cases endoscopy; rarely, a surgical revision is needed. In this series we reviewed our experience with surgical revisions of the GJ in patients that did not respond to an endoscopic treatment algorithm. Patients & Methods After IRB approval, we retrospectively reviewed the charts of all patients who underwent LRYGBP between July 2000 and December 2007. Data of patients, who required surgical intervention due to GJ complications including: gender, age, preoperative body mass index (BMI), time of presentation from the initial surgery, postoperative complications, and mortality were documented. Result: During the study period 2,098 patients underwent LRGBP for the treatment of morbid obesity. Ten patients (0.4%) required corrective surgery for problems at the GJ. There were nine females and one male, the average age was 43 years (range 23 -62 years), and the average BMI was 37.8 kg/m2 (range 20-56 kg/m2). The most common symptoms were sialorrhea, vomiting, nausea and abdominal pain. Eighty percent of the patients had more than one reason for surgical revision. We identified a stricture in 8 patients (80%), a non-healing marginal ulceration in 4 patients (40%), Gastro -Gastric fistula in 2 patients (20%), a perforation after dilation in 3 patients (30%), gastroparesis in 1 patient (10%) and an enlarged anastomosis in 1 patient (10%). In this series, one mortality (10%) was found and the morbidity was 20%. Conclusions: The most frequent cause for revision of a GJ was anastomotic stricture. The high morbidity and mortality presented in this series should warn surgeons to have clear indications and surgical expertise when performing this delicate procedure. Introduction: Unexpected findings during laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGB) are frequent and consist mainly of peritoneal adhesions, hernias, organomegaly, gallstones and adnexal cysts. These findings are relatively frequent and their management remains a part of every day bariatric practice. Unexpected and unusual intraoperative findings are only sporadically encountered during LRYGB. Management and clinical decision making of such encounters remains poorly described and largely depends on surgeons? experience. Methods: This is a review of prospectively collected database of the consecutive 525 morbidly obese patients who underwent LRYGB between August 2001 and September of 2008. As a part of clinical pathways all patients were evaluated preoperatively with upper endoscopy and abdominal sonogram. Female patients over 40 years-old also underwent pelvic sonogram. Results: There were six significant and unusual intraoperative findings that have altered the conduct of the planned procedure. These were: Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) of the stomach (2), GIST of the small intestine (1), ectopic pancreas of the proximal jejunum (1), complete malrotation of the bowel (1), hemoperitoneum due to perforated hemorrhagic ovarian cyst. The therapeutic decisions made were as follow; resection of GIST tumors (3), biopsy of the 3 cm mass of the jejunum (ectopic pancreas) (1), laparoscopic lysis of the Ladd?s bands and completion of the LRYGB, evacuation of the hemoperitoneum and abortion of the procedure (1 each). All patients made an uneventful recovery. The patient with malrotation was reoperated on postoperative day 28 for abdominal pain and completion of Ladds procedure and appendectomy was performed. Conclusions: Intraoperative findings that are unexpected and unusual during LRYGB require decision making that may result in therapeutic resection, biopsy or abortion of the planned procedure. Background Elderly (65 years and older) obese patients are expected to be at high risk for bariatric surgery. We sought to study outcomes in elderly patients undergoing bariatric surgery with or without Medicare (MC, since 2006) , and to evaluate differences in co-morbidities when compared to a meta-analysis study of younger patients. Methods: Elderly patients undergoing bariatric surgery with or without MC were retrospectively reviewed in our database from 2000 to present. Parameters studied included pre-operative weight, co-morbidities, medications, length of stay (LOS), complications, mortality, and percent excess weight loss (%EWL). Incidences of co-morbidities were compared to a meta-analysis review of 22,094 patients between the ages of 16 and 64 (JAMA, 2004 (JAMA, , 292:1724 Introduction: Surgical weight loss has been shown to effectively lead to improvements of obesity associated comorbid conditions. The goal of our study was to compare the timing of comorbidity resolution between laparoscopic roux-en-y gastric bypass (LRYGB) and laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding (LAGB). Methods: All patients (n = 476) undergoing LRYGB or LAGB at our institution over a 2 year period were prospectively entered in a bariatric database., Percentage excess weight loss and comorbidity changes were recorded at 2 and 6 weeks and 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively. Comorbidities evaluated included diabetes (DM), hypertension (HTN), reflux (GERD), and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)and their changes were assessed by the operating surgeon at each follow-up visit on a 4 point scale (1 = resolved, 2 = improved, 3 = unchanged, 4 = worse). Chi-square was used to compare differences in % comorbidity resolution at each interval. P < 0.05 was considered significant. Results: During the study period,339 patients underwent LRYGB and 137 LAGB. Patient age was 42 ± 9.9, 87% were women, and BMI was 45.3 ± 5. At baseline 36.1% of patients had diabetes, 63.6% hypertension, 60.4% GERD, 36.1% OSA and there were no differences between the groups. Fewer postoperative complications occurred in the LAGB group and there were no mortalities. %EWL and comorbidity resolution was better after LRYGB compared to LAGB. With the exception of OSA, DM, HTN, and GERD improved and stabilized early after surgery (see table) . Values reflect percentages of patients with comorbidity resolution or improvement* p-value refers to pair-wise comparisons (LRYGB vs LAGB) at each intervalConclusion: Overall improvement/resolution of DM, HTN, and GERD occurs early after weight loss surgery and is more pronounced after LRYGB compared to LAGB. This information may be important for the preoperative counseling of morbidly obese patients. Further work is needed and currently underway to incorporate objective data on comorbidity resolution and expand our patient pool and follow up period. The relevance of using fluroscopy as a routine in gastric banding control Hypothesis: using fluroscopy as a routine in performing gastric banding controls will enable early detection of possible complications and will optimize the adjustment of the band. Method: 100 patients were strictly followed up in our center for LGB control. All controls were done routinely in the x-ray department under fluroscopy. The plan of controls was 1st day, 6 weeks, monthly postoperative until the optimal adjustment of the band, than as necessary. Gastrographin was used in the first control and barium in the following controls. In standing position, patients were given contrast to swallow under fluroscopy. The position and angle of band, time of passage through the band, the width of passage and the formation of pouch in addition to the type of oesophageal peristalsis and oesophagial diameters were recorded. Adjustment of band was done accordingly and another contrast swallow was confirming the good adjustment or a readjustment was necessary. the patient weight, eating habits and presence of any symptoms related to the band were documented. The number of controls needed for each patient and the pathology detected at what period in the postoperative time were also registered. Results: 15 cases of asymptomatic patients with severe oesophageal dilatation, tertiary persitalsis and very slow emptying of the contrast were detected. in 10 cases, the oesophageal dilatation could be reversed and the function of the band could be restored with emptying of the band, medications and successive adjustments of the band, 4 patients the dilatation was recurred by adjustemt of the band and this combined with insufficient weight loss. Band was removed and a simulatneous gastric bypass was done. By 1 patients, incomplete ersosion was diagnosed and the band was removed. could be withmany cases of band slippage were detected on time before. 2 cases of disconnection of the port, 2 cases of torsion of the port, 1 case of baloon rupture with escape of contrast were detected in asymptomatic patients. 2 cases of slippage and 1 case of ersoion were detected in symptomatic patients. Conclusion: in 10% of cases the fuction of the band could be restored and unreversible oesophageal dilatation which could lead to future slippage were corrected. Using the fluroscopy with contrast swallow as a routine is useful to detect the complication earlier than the symptoms and will reduce the rate of complications after gastric banding. , the question of insufflation gas choice has re-risen. The objective of this study was to examine the impact of CO2 and air on plasma cytokine levels and peritoneal cell expression of inflammatory mediators. Methods: Eight pigs underwent unilateral uterine horn resection using a 3-trocar technique. The animals were divided into 2 groups -laparoscopic with CO2 insufflation (CO2) and laparoscopic with air insufflation (AIR). Peritoneal lavage specimens were taken at 0, 1, and 4 hours from the time of incision. Lymphocytes, monocytes, and granulocytes were analyzed for phospho p38 expression using flow cytometry. Plasma tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a?) was analyzed using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and compared at 0, 1, 2, and 4 hours from the time of incision. Welch-Satterthwaite t test was performed to compare the groups. Differences between groups were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05. Results: Peak TNF-a?levels were lower in the CO2 group compared to the AIR group (p = 0.0034). Peritoneal lavage specimens only had sufficient cell counts for analysis at 4 hours after surgery. While not statistically significant due to insufficient sample size, phospho p38 expression was decreased in all cell types in the CO2 group compared to the AIR group (Table 1) . Conclusions: Laparoscopy with CO2 appears to result in decreased acute systemic inflammatory response in the forms of decreased levels of TNF-a?and decreased expression of phospho p38 in peritoneal cells compared to AIR. This is consistent with previously reported results comparing the CO2 and air insufflation, and suggests that CO2 should be used for insufflation for NOTES instead of air. Background: The metabolic syndrome describes the association between obesity and a host of co-morbidities including insulin resistance, hypertension, dyslipidemia, and cardiovascular (CV) disease. Adipokines produced from omentum increase the inflammatory state and reportedly contribute to the risk of CV disease. This study examines the genetic differences in the omental tissue of morbidly obese diabetic and non-diabetic patients. Methods: Twenty morbidly obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery (BMI greater than 35) were included. Ten patients were diabetic and ten were nondiabetic. Omental samples were collected intra-operatively and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. RNA was extracted using the Trizol reagent and protocol. 100 ng of purified RNA (Qiagen) was amplified and labeled using the Affymetrix protocol and the Affymetrix GeneChip array. The microarray data was analyzed with the Partek program using an unpaired t-test (p < 0.05). The gene expression profiles of the diabetic group were compared to the nondiabetic group. Using the Ingenuity program, the gene list generated from the microarray analysis was evaluated for relevant biologic themes. Real time quantitative PCR (QPCR) was used to validate the array data. Results: The diabetic group identified 99 upregulated genes and 13 down regulated genes with greater than 1.5 fold difference in expression. Ingenuity analysis demonstrated numerous dysregulated genes associated with CV disease including leptin, Von Willebrand Factor, P-Selectin and Periostin osteoblast specific factor. Of note, leptin was increased 1.6 fold in diabetic patients on the microarray analysis. Leptin upregulation was confirmed with QPCR and showed a 1.9 fold change. Conclusions: Our microarray analysis of the visceral fat from morbidly obese diabetics and morbidly obese non-diabetics documents a host of up-regulated genes related to CV disease. This study sheds further insight into the genomic relationship between diabetes and CV. This information will help guide further cell line analyses. Background: Through relatively unknown mechanisms, bariatric surgery can resolve type 2 diabetes in morbidly obese patients. Potentially, pre-and post-operative changes in adiponectin and leptin expression are involved in this process. This study attempts to identify differences in gene expression in diabetic and non-diabetic patients undergoing bariatric surgery with regards to adiponectin and leptin. Methods: Seventeen morbidly obese patients undergoing bariatric surgery were included in this study. Eight patients were diabetic and nine patients were non-diabetic. In addition, four non-obese, non-diabetic blood samples were included. Blood samples were drawn pre and post-operatively and stabilized in Paxgene tubes (PreAnalytix). Total RNA was extracted and purified (Qiagen). 100 ng of total RNA was amplified and labeled using the Ovation RNA Amplification System V2 with the Ovation Whole Blood reagent (Nugen) before hybridizing to an Affymetrix Focus array containing over 8500 verified genes. Microarray results were analyzed using the GeneSpring program which uses an ANOVA analysis. Finally, real time quantitative PCR (QPCR) was used to verify genes of interest. Results: Overall, 167 genes were upregulated and 39 genes were down-regulated in the obese diabetic patients versus obese non-diabetic patients. Pre-operatively, adiponectin was down-regulated 1.5 fold for diabetic versus non-diabetic patients. Leptin expression was not different between the two groups. However, post-operative leptin expression was up-regulated 2 fold using QPCR Of note, post-operative leptin expression was similar to leptin expression in non-obese, non-diabetic patients. Introduction: Laryngo-pharyngeal reflux (LPR) refers to symptoms caused by backflow of gastric contents to the larynx and pharynx. Concurrent pH recordings at increasing distances above the LES are reported to show a linear decrease in acid exposure as the distance from the LES increases. While abnormal distal esophageal acid exposure is common in patients with LPR, abnormal proximal esophageal acid exposure in the absence of abnormal distal reflux has also been reported. The aim of this study was to assess if patients with proximal reflux alone have different physiologic characteristics of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) and the esophageal body than patients with combined proximal and distal reflux. Subjects and Methods: Patients who underwent combined proximal and distal pH monitoring and esophageal motility studies were identified, excluding those studied on antireflux medication and those with previous foregut surgery. Abnormal reflux was defined based on % total time less than 4 (> 4.4% in the distal and > 1% in the proximal esophagus). Patients were classified into three groups (1) isolated distal reflux (2) isolated proximal reflux ( Introduction: Gastroesophageal reflux-associated chronic aspiration contributes to the development of various lung disease processes including chronic pulmonary allograft dysfunction, as manifested by the histologic finding of bronchiolitis obliterans (BO). The TLR-4 innate immune pathway is thought to play a role in these processes and may be activated by bacteria within the gastric contents. Here we examine whether LPS, a TLR-4 agonist found in bacteria, leads to the progression of BO when inhaled by rats with left lung allografts. Methods: Thirteen F344 rats underwent left lung transplantation using WKY rat donors. Three times a week for 15 weeks, starting 1 week after the transplant, rats were exposed for 1 hour to an aerosolized solution of either LPS or sterile 0.9% saline. All rats were given 5 mg/kg cyclosporine three times weekly. After 15 weeks, all rats were sacrificed, and tissue from each lobe of transplanted and native lungs was prepared for pathologic review. A board-certified pathologist then graded every visible airway on all slides on a scale from 0 (no BO) to 3 (severe BO) in a blinded fashion. Introduction: Natural Orifice Translumenal Endoscopic Surgery (NOTES) promises decreased invasiveness by performing intra-abdominal procedures while avoiding the abdominal wall. Data from a randomized blinded study showed significant divergence of heart rate and diastolic blood pressure for NOTES animals compared to laparoscopy animals. We compared animals undergoing diagnostic or interventional NOTES with animals undergoing standard endoscopy over a 30 minute period. Hypothesis: There will be no difference between the groups. Methods: 37 female 50 kg domestic swine were randomized to 3 groups using permuted block design. The diagnostic NOTES group (group 1, n = 11) underwent NOTES diagnostic peritoneoscopy using air insufflation. Group 2 (n = 14) underwent diagnostic endoscopy with gastric irrigation (no gastrotomy). The interventional NOTES group (group 3, n = 12) underwent transgastric mesh placement. All animals received invasive hemodynamic monitoring and ABG at baseline, 10 minutes and 30 minutes. Data collection was blinded from the start of the pneumoperitoneum (group 1& 3) or gastric intubation (group 2). Groups were contrasted with repeated measures linear models (SAS v9.1). The study was IACUC approved. Results: As in the prior study, no difference in the systolic blood pressure was noted. A statistically significant difference in the diastolic blood pressure (DBP) between groups was noted at time 0 (p = 0.05). This corresponds with the beginning of the pneumoperitoneum for groups 1&3 and the start of endoscopy for group 2. The mean DBP was 14 points higher in group 2 than group 1 (p = 0.02). However two animals exhibited very low DBP and when analysis was repeated after the outliers were removed, the difference did not remain significant. Mean bladder pressure was 5.4 +/)6.2 cm H2O in group 1, 6.9 +/)8.4 in group 2 and 5.7 +/)6.6 in group 3. Heart rate and ABG values were not statistically significantly different (p > 0.10) between groups. Conclusion: Hemodynamic measurements suggest a similar reaction for diagnostic or interventional NOTES and endoscopy animals over a 30 minute time period. Comparing these results with results between laparoscopy and endoscopy this might support the less invasive effect of NOTES. Introduction: In the face of high caloric intake and low levels of physical exertion, obesity induces sympathetic nervous system activation. This increased autonomic activity is manifested as higher blood pressure in obese patients, and as a result, excess body weight is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity. Furthermore, it has been shown that when patients lose weight, their blood pressure falls, and this is believed to result from a decrement in sympathetic nervous system activation that can be induced by weight loss. However, it is not known if the reduction in weight diminishes sympathetic nervous system responsiveness when subjects are being stressed. We hypothesized that weight loss not only reduces blood pressure at rest, but also, there is a concomitant reduction in autonomic responsiveness to stress. Methods: We recruited 31 subjects with a body mass index over 35 kg/m2 who were awaiting weight loss surgery and 7 subjects who had received bariatric surgery and were at least one year out from surgery. We measured hemodynamics in these patients while they were resting, and again after inducing stress with two experimental paradigms. The orthostatic challenge test and cold pressor tests are two safe, commonly used, non-invasive assessments of sympathetic nervous system reactivity. In the cold pressor test, resting patients are seated and asked to place their hand in ice-cold water for one minute. It has been shown that patients with exaggerated hemodynamic responsiveness to the discomfort of cold water immersion are more likely to develop high blood pressure and other risk factors associated with cardiovascular morbidity. Similarly, it has been shown that individuals who are genetically predisposed to develop cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension have greater sympathetic responses to orthostatic stress. In the orthostatic stress test, patients are asked to stand suddenly after lying comfortably supine and changes in hemodynamic variables are recorded. Results: As expected, patients with a history of morbid obesity who underwent weight loss surgery had significantly lower systolic blood pressure and mean arterial pressure when compared to obese subjects awaiting surgery. Most importantly, these reductions in resting blood pressures were maintained in post-operative patients when they were stressed with either an orthostatic challenge or the cold pressor test (* denotes p < 0.05 when comparing pre-and post-surgery values). Conclusions: Surgically-induced weight loss not only reduces cardiovascular risk factors such as elevated blood pressure in patients while they are at rest, but also, during maneuvers designed to induce significant stress and reflex autonomic reactivity. Reductions in stress-induced increases in blood pressure accompany the weight loss induced by surgery. It remains to be determined whether other indicators of sympathetic nervous systemdependent hyperactivity such as platelet aggregation and the release of inflammatory cytokines are similarly reduced. These risk factors are being prospectively evaluated in this cohort of volunteers. Findings included a small amount of chylous-appearing peritoneal fluid and a lobulated mass involving the small bowel mesentery. Laparoscopic resection of the cystic mass including the short segment of jejeunum was undertaken with primary anastamosis. She had complete resolution of her symptoms. The diagnosis on final pathology was that of a mesenteric lymphangioma measuring 7 · 6 cm. Lymphangiomas are congenital malformations thought to be the result of failure of the primary lymphatic sacs to join the lymph system. These are most often seen in the pediatric population as a head, neck, or axillary mass. Less than 1% are found in the small bowel mesentery. Considering the rarity of this benign cystic tumor and the vague presenting symptoms, one must have a high index of suspicion to sort this out. Introduction: CT is considered the ?gold standard? in the diagnosis of acute appendicitis (AA). The radiation dose associated with an abdominal CT has recently been revisited, leading to a reassessment of indications to perform CT for AA. The Alvarado score for AA, determined prior to CT, is compared to CT and pathology results and recommendations are made on the utilization of CT for AA. Methods and Procedures: Over a 12 month period, 201 patients (77 males, 124 female) in a community hospital ED, with a clinical suspicion of AA, were enrolled by ED physicians. The Alvarado clinical score was performed by the ED physician prior to reviewing the CT result. Consultation with surgical services, after all investigations had been performed, was at the discretion of the ED physician. Demographics, CT and pathology results were collected and analyzed. Results: CT for AA had a sensitivity of 95.8%, specificity of 98.7% and accuracy of 98%. The average Alvarado score for a positive CT was 6.9 and for a negative CT was 4.8 (p < 0.005). The Alvarado score, compared with positive CT for AA, is a significant variable (p < 0.005). Gender was also significant, with males more likely to have a positive CT (p < 0.0001). There was no significant difference with age (p = 0.3516). Probabilities of positive CT per Alvarado score for gender (average age 30) Conclusion:This study revealed a significant gender difference for the Alvarado score for AA, with the endpoint of a positive CT. Recommendations for the utilization of CT in the diagnosis of AA, include: a probability of under 0.075 of a positive CT for AA as an acceptable level not to perform a CT, including males with scores of 2 or less and female with scores of 4 or less; a probability over 0.5 of a positive CT, surgical consultation prior to imaging, including males with a score of 7 or greater and females with a score of 10. The mid range scores of 4 through 9 for females and 3 through 6 for males are considered equivocal and CT is recommended. Mean duration of disease was 9 years before the complication of enterovesicle fistula presented. Presenting symptoms included: recurrent urinary tract infection (10 patients), pneumaturia (7 patients), pelvic pain (5 patients) and frank fecaluria (2 patients). In two patients the diagnosis was made incidentally during operation. Almost all patients suffered from an ileovesicle fistula (12 patients), two had a fistula between the sigmoid colon and the urinary bladder and one had a rectovesicle fistula. Multiple additional fistulas including enterocutaneous, ileoileal and ileocolic were noted in 5 patients. All patients with an ileovesicle fistula underwent an ileocecal resection with resection of the fistula tract debridement and repair of the bladder. Additional procedures were added depending on the findings. One of the two patients with sigmoid vesicle fistula underwent segmental sigmoid resection and the other had a subtotal colectomy due to diffuse longstanding colonic disease. One patient with rectovesicle fistula underwent a low anterior resection and was the only patient who required conversion to an open procedure (6% Introduction: Opportunity cost is the value of an activity forgone to participate in some other activity. With respect to surgery, an innovation incurs an opportunity cost when it uses additional operating time that could otherwise be used in a productive way. Although fundamental to the economist?s view of costs, opportunity cost is infrequently used in the laparoscopic literature. In an environment of limited resources, providers must understand opportunity cost and apply it to the assessment of new technologies. We present an example of assessing opportunity cost in the transition from open to laparoscopic colectomy using pooled analysis data from the surgical literature and hospital financial data. Methods: Using an OVID/MEDLINE search of English language journals between the years 1998 and 2008, we identified studies from which we pooled data related to costs and operating room times for laparoscopic versus open colectomy. The weighted mean differences for these variables were calculated using inverse variance weights. Where appropriate, standard deviations were imputed based on reported p-values or confidence intervals, following the guidelines outlined in Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions. Using our university hospital 2007 financial records, we then identified the five most frequently performed, elective general surgery procedures. Their profit margins were determined and then divided by their average surgical time in order to calculate a range of opportunity cost multipliers. We then applied these opportunity cost multipliers to the additional time required to perform laparoscopic colectomy (versus open colectomy) to demonstrate that procedure?s true overall cost. Results: Seven comparative studies in the literature were identified representing 11,326 laparoscopic and 21,319 open colectomies. Based on the pooled analysis, operating time was longer for a laparoscopic colectomy by 27.08 minutes (p < .0001). Additionally, laparoscopic colectomies had slightly higher total costs, with a difference of $104.67, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.28). The five highest volume, elective procedures chosen were laparoscopic cholecystectomy, laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair, breast biopsy, partial mastectomy and total thyroidectomy. By multiplying these procedures? profit margins by their surgical times, we obtained five opportunity cost multipliers with a range between $9/minute and $26/minute. Depending on which opportunity cost multiplier one uses, the opportunity cost of using an additional 27.08 minutes to perform laparoscopic colectomy ranges between $243.72 and $704.08, which is approximately 2 to 6 times greater than the point estimate of difference in total costs based on published studies. Conclusion Although frequently overlooked, opportunity cost is a potentially very important element of assessing the true costs of surgical innovation. (Technique) After the dissection of rectal anal side, the lower abdomen is cut by small incision, and the wound retractor was attached at the wound margin. Y-shaped hood was installed in this, the anal side of the lesion was clamped by J-shaped foreceps, and the irrigation was done under the pneumoperitoneum. The forceps was moved to the sleeve one of Y-shaped hood, and the automatic suture machine (Curvedcutter) is inserted from the other sleeve, and the suturing and cutting were done. Because the hand is outside of the body though it is hand for under the insufflation of the abdominal cavity assistance, it is called the Extracorporeal HALS method. This method was used in a case that the multiple stapling was expected in rectal cutting. (Object and method) Sep2000 -Sep2008, The short-term results were compared between the DST that used two times and more of the automatic suture machine for the laparoscopy-assisted surgery with the E-HALS. (Results) The multiple stapling were 106 cases, and E-HALSs were 27 cases. The short-term results of both groups did not have the difference. The anastomotic leakage was not different but the frequency of it in E-HALS was a little fewer (7.4% vs. 11.3% in the multiple stapling). The medical costs of the rectal cutting were significant (53,296 Japanese Yen in E-HALS vs. 92,594 Japanese Yen in the multiple stapling, the difference was about 370 dollars, P < 0.05). rectal procedures underwent. The ten cases with rectal cancer underwent using the new technique in theses days. The patient was injected ICG to four places in the submucosal membrane near the tumor before the day of the operation. The five trocars were placed including for the flexible scope. After dissection of lymph nodes and ligation of the individual vessels, descending colon and upper rectum were free from the peritoneum using electrocautery and Sonosurg. And the rectal mesentery around the anal side of the tumor was cleared away. The wound of the port at navel was extended for 5 cm and the Alexis was placed there. The rubber glove was attached to Alexis and the Fogarty aorta interception clamp was inserted in the abdominal cavity reversing the part of two fingers. After the injected points of ICG were confirmed, the rectum was clamped using the Fogarty. The distal rectum was irrigated by 500 ml saline and divided using ENDO Cutter that was inserted through another finger of rubber glove. The intestine was pulled out through Alexis. The resection of the sigmoid colon was performed and the anvil was placed within the lumen using pursestring. After the intestine was returned into the abdominal cavity, a 31 mm circular stapler was introduced through the anus. Then the anastomosis was performed between sigmoid colon and rectum. A drain was left in the pelvis. Results: There were no complications during the operation. The patient tolerated the procedure well and had no complications. The patient was discharged well and is currently doing well. Conclusions: The special preparation is not necessary in this method. Although it is necessary that we experience the number of the cases and examine the prognosis of the patients in the long time, this method is very simple, useful and certain to prevent recurrence of the anastomosis for rectal cancer. Purpose : Plasma VEGF levels are elevated after minimally invasive colon resection (MICR) and may pose a danger for colon cancer (CRC) patients. It is thought that surgical wounds produce VEGF which enters the circulation. VEGF induces angiogenesis in wounds and tumors by binding to endothelial cell bound VEGF-Receptor 1 (VEGFR1) and VEGF-Receptor 2 (VEGFR2). Soluble VEGFR1 (sVEGFR1) and sVEGFR2, not capable of signal transduction, bind VEGF in the blood and decrease free VEGF levels and limit VEGF?s proangiogenic effects. This study?s purpose was to assess plasma levels of sVEGFR1 and 2 in CRC patients after MICR. Methods: Blood samples were obtained preoperatively (PreOp) and on postoperative day (POD) 1 and 3(n = 45). In some patients a 4th and a 5th sample were taken between POD 7-13 and POD 14-30 after surgery. sVEGFR1 and 2 levels were measured via ELISA and the results reported as median + 95% CI for sVEFGR1 and mean ± SD for sVEGFR2. The POD 7-13 and POD 14-30 samples were bundled and considered as two separate time points. The student t-test was used for sVEGFR2 and the Wilcoxon signed rank test for sVEGFR1 (significance, p < 0.05). Results: The mean incision size was 5.7 ± 3.7 cm (4 conversions Introduction: Self-expanding metallic stents (SEMS) are being used for ''palliation'' and as a ''bridge'' to surgery in obstructing colorectal disease. This approach may be associated with less morbidity and mortality than immediate operation for this surgical emergency. A laparoscopic approach is usually contraindicated due to bowel distention encountered in this acute situation. However, by relieving the obstruction with SEMS, laparoscopic colon resection becomes feasible in an elective setting. We present our early experience with combining these minimally invasive techniques in the management of left-sided large bowel obstruction. Methods: 14 consecutive patients that presented with left-sided colonic obstruction underwent an attempt at SEMS. Ten had advanced, metastatic or recurrent malignancy and were treated with SEMS for palliation in order to avoid a stoma. Three patients were treated with SEMS as a ''bridge'' to surgery and underwent laparoscopic anterior resection. Results: No significant complications occurred, specifically, no perforations. There was one failure in a patient with obstruction secondary to severe diverticular disease. Of the three patients that underwent laparoscopic colectomy, none required conversion to open. Conclusion: Laparoscopic colectomy and self-expanding metal stents are minimally invasive techniques that have been slow to gain wide acceptance, but their use and advantages are extensively published. These cases demonstrate how left-sided large bowel obstruction can be managed by combining two minimally invasive techniques and, thus, decrease morbidity and avoid the need for a stoma. Whether this approach will improve outcome in this patient population will require further study. However, our early experience and success is promising. Purpose: The role of laparoscopy in patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) has been controversial given its technical difficulty, high conversion rate, and complication rate. We present our experience of laparoscopic dissection and transection of rectum in the FAP patients. Methods: Consecutive 9 patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery for FAP were recruited. Eight patients combined with carcinoma arising from FAP. All the operations were performed by the same surgeon, who had already completed the learning curve for colorectal laparoscopic procedures. Results: Eight of the patients underwent laparoscopic total proctocolectomy (LTPC) and one patient underwent a laparoscopic total abdominal colectomy (LTAC). No hand-assisted laparoscopic technique was performed. There was no conversion case and postoperative mortality. The median operative time was 320 (range, 210-480) min, and the median blood loss was 210 (range, 50-500) ml. The median time to feeding was 2 (range, 2-3) days, and the median hospital stay was 9 (range, 7-12) days. There were two postoperative complications (small bowel obstructions Purpose: Angiostatin and endostatin are endogenous inhibitors of angiogenesis that have been shown to have anti-cancer effects. Major surgery has been associated with significantly elevated plasma VEGF and Angiopoetin 2 levels for the first 3 weeks after colorectal resection. Furthermore, human plasma from the second and third Postoperative week has been shown to stimulate in vitro endothelial cell proliferation and migration rates when compared to culture results with preoperative plasma. Thus, the patient is in a pro-angiogenic state early after surgery. Surgery?s impact on perioperative angiostatin and endostatin levels is unknown. This study?s purpose was to determine the periop levels of these two proteins in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients undergoing minimally invasive colon resection (MICR). Methods: Plasma endostatin levels were assessed in 34 CRC patients while angiostatin levels were determined for 30 CRC patients. Blood samples were taken preoperatively (PO) and on postoperative day (POD) 1 and 3 in all patients; in a subset samples were also taken between POD 7-20. The late samples (POD 7-13, POD and 14-20) were bundled and considered as single time points. Plasma angiostatin and endostatin levels were determined via ELISA in duplicate. For the endostatin data the median value and the 95% Confidence intervals are provided and the Wilcoxon signed rank test was utilized. For the angiostatin data the students t-test was used after logarithmic transformation of the data to a normal distribution (data reported as mean +/)SD, significance, p < 0.05 whereas patients with midline incisions had a rate of 33.6% (p = 0.07). Conclusion:The overall SSI rate at our institution following laparoscopic-assisted colon resection was found to be higher than previously published. However, we believe that this is a more accurate rate of postoperative infection than is typically reported due to our thorough 30 day follow up and strict inclusion criteria. Although we found a much lower rate of Pfannenstiel infections than midline infections it was not statistically significant. This may be due to the low number of Pfannenstiel incisions in our study. However, these results suggest that the use of the Pfannenstiel incision may improve postoperative infection rates in laparoscopic-assisted colorectal surgery and should be further investigated with a larger sample size and across multiple centers. Objective: To develop a quantitative in vivo test method for measuring acute blood loss and time to hemostasis in order to assess the hemostatic performance of investigational linear stapling and dividing devices. Methods: All animals were screened pre-operatively for clotting sufficiency. Pertinent vital parameters were also controlled within narrow limits during testing (MAP = 80 ± 10 mmHg, ACT not changed by 10% of original measurement). Linear stapling and dividing devices were deployed in standard fashion in vivo in a variety of gastrointestinal tissues. Immediately after firing, pre-weighed absorbent paper was used to absorb blood from the divided edges of the stapled tissue. The blood soaked paper was weighed on a calibrated digital scale (to within ± 0.005 gram) and imported into a spreadsheet. Serial measurements were taken every 60 seconds, for a 15 second time period, until the amount of bleeding was less than or equal to 5% (by weight) of the previous weight. A decision tree embedded within the spreadsheet identified when the amount of staple line bleeding had fallen below the designated cut off point. Preliminary results: Statistically significant differences in hemostatic performance between the control and developmental stapling devices were demonstrated with this testing protocol. Conclusions: Variation in subject-to-subject measurements can be reduced by pre and intra-operative screening/monitoring. Human error can also be reduced by quantitatively defining end points versus relying on more subjective visual assessments. This test method provides an accurate and repeatable way to quantitatively compare the hemostatic performance of different stapling technologies. Intraoperative parameters (operation time, blood loss, and rate of conversion to the laparotomy) and post operative parameters (start date of oral intake, discharge date, and complication occurred within 30 days after operation) were compared in these two groups. There were no differences in distribution of gender and stages in these two groups. The incidence of chronic disease was significantly higher in Group A than that of Group B (70.8% vs 49.8%, p = 0.0003). ResultsThe rate of conversion to laparotomy was significantly higher in Group A than in Group B (10.1% vs. 3.1%, p = 0.007). However, there were no differences in blood loss and operation time between these two groups (66.0 g vs. 48.5 g, 211.6 min vs. 204.1 min, respectively). The main reason of conversion to the laparotomy was narrow field of view due to mesenteric fat and/or advanced adhesion. There were no significant differences in start date of oral intake ( Introduction: While most mild episodes of acute diverticulitis respond well to medical therapy, surgical treatment is indicated in the complicated forms of the disease with abscess and/or peritonitis. We evaluate our initial results of treatment of complicated acute diverticulitis by laparoscopic irrigation and drainage only with no colon resection. METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Three patients with acute sigmoid diverticulitis presented to us, one with diffuse peritonitis, and the other two with abscesses that could not be accessed percutaneously by an interventional radiologist. One was a pelvic abscess, and the other was interloop in nature. Both patients underwent a laparoscopic exploration, lysis of the inflammatory adhesions and phlegmon, irrigation and drainage. No clear colonic perforation could be identified in any of the patients. Estimated blood loss was minimal. Patients were kept on intravenous antibiotics then transitioned to oral antibiotics. Postoperative courses were unremarkable and average hospital stay was 4 days. There was no wound infection or recurrent intra-abdominal infection. One patient subsequently underwent uneventful elective laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy. Conclusion: Laparoscopic irrigation and drainage with possible colorraphy could be considered a valid alternative to the traditional sigmoid colectomy with/without colostomy or diversion in the management of complicated and perforated sigmoid diverticulitis in selected patients. It may potentially decrease overall and wound-related morbidity, avoid an ostomy and facilitate interval definitive procedure. The main doubt reducing enthusiasm for the radiofrequency remodeling technique (secca) was based on lack of physiological studies, which may explain the possible pathomechanism of improvement of symptoms. AIM: The aim of this study was clinical physiological evaluation of the anorectal function prior and during 12 months follow-up after the secca procedure. MATERIAL: 16 fecal incontinence (FI) patients (4 male and 12 female, mean age 59 ranged 41-78 years) have been enrolled into the study. The standard technique and secca device was used (Curon Medical, Freemont, CA USA). The following parameters were evaluated at baseline, 3, 6 and 12 months after the procedure: continence (CCF-FI, FI-SI scores), improvement (FI-QoL, patient diary, VAS), electromyography (EAS-superficial, IAS-needle), rectal electro-and thermosensitivity, barostat, anal manometry, morphology (endoanal ultrasound). Results: Comparing to baseline, 1, 3, 6 and 12 months average results were as follows: CCF-FI 12,1 -10, [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [3] [4] [5] [6] 8; 8; compliance 5, [0] [1] [2] [3] [4] [2] [3] [4] 0; manometry BAP 30, [23] [24] [25] [26] [27] [28] [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34] [35] [36] [37] [38] [39] SAP 73, 3 ; electrosensation 23 -53 -52 -41 -37, thermosensation 0,7 -0,28 -0,3 -0,4 -0,4, respectively. In FI-Qol scale significant improvement in 4 of 4 measures was observed, as well as IAS and EAS electromyography improvement. Conclusions: Secca remodeling is safe and seems to be effective method of FI treatment. It reduces the frequency and severity of FI symptoms, and improves patient?s quality of life. This effect seems to be related to restored anorectal sensitivity and recto-anal coordination, however effect on IAS morphology and function is also detectable. Chris Edwards MD, Alan Bradshaw MD, Regional Surgical Specialists, Mission Hospitals, Asheville NC Objective: Single incision laparoscopic surgery (SILS) is a new advance wherein laparoscopic surgery is carried out through a single small incision hidden in the umbilicus. The use of this technique has been described for many urological and GYN procedures. However, the use of this procedure in general surgery so far has been largely limited to cholecystectomy. Little has been published of its use in other general surgical procedures. The objective of this study is to describe the safety and feasibility of SILS appendectomy in a single community based institution. Methods: A retrospective review of a prospectively collected database was reviewed on all patients who underwent SILS appendectomy. Both single incision three-port technique as well as single incision dual-port technique with transabdominal suture retraction of the appendix was used. All patients were included including any conversions to traditional laparoscopic technique. Operative and perioperative outcomes were analyzed using standard statistical methods. Results: 8 SILS appys (6 three-port and 2 suture retraction) were performed from 7/30/08 -10/1/08 (indications: 5 early, 2 suppurative, and 1 gangrenous . Full-thickness excision was performed on 76 patients and submucosal local excision on 14. The mean distance from the anal verge was 10.6 cm. 34% of the lesions were located on the anterior wall, 40% on the posterior and 17% on the side wall. The mean operative time was 80 min (range 30 -180 min). Average blood loss was 45 ml (range 0 -150 ml). The mean length of stay was 3.6 days (range 1-11 days). Peri-and postoperative mortality was 0,0%. Complication included urinary retention (4), bleeding (2), wound dehiscence (1), rectocutaneous fistula (1). Postoperative fecal incontinence was observed in 3 patients. In the follow-up time between 6 and 46 months local recurrence rate reached 6,7% in the adenoma group and up to 30% in the malign diseases group. Conclusions: Transanal endoscopic rectal operation is a safe and cost efficient procedure for local excision of selected patients with recital tumors. It significantly reduces the number of postoperative functional disturbances what allows to maintain good quality of life with acceptable local recurrence rate and postopeative morbidity. Sphincter protection using nitroglicerin ointment reduces also almost entirely possibility of sphincter damage due to introduction of operational rectoscope. Because of the association of serrated adenomas with microsatellite instability in concomitant colon polyps, a more vigilant surveillance may be needed to screen for colon cancer. This is an interesting case of a serrated adenoma of the appendix as a cause of acute appendicitis. This patient is a 70 year old male who presented with intermittent right lower quadrant pain for one week. Initial laboratory data revealed leukocytosis with a left shift, normocytic anemia, and thrombocytosis. A CT of the abdomen showed inflammatory stranding in the RLQ, free fluid in the pelvis, and an appendix measuring 6 mm. After admission for diverticulitis, an ultrasound of the appendix revealed a noncompressible appendix with fat stranding in the pelvis. An Lap appendectomy was performed. Lap visualization revealed an inflamed appendix with a gangrenous tip. Pathological exam demonstrated the presence of acute appendicitis with rupture and a sessile serrated adenoma that was completely contained within the specimen. Because of the association with microsatellite instability in concomitant colon polyps with possible progression to colon cancer, a post operative colonoscopy was performed. This revealed hyperplastic polyps in the right colon. Due to the fact microsatellite instability may exist in any or all of the polyps with increased risk of progression to colon cancer, arguments can be made to decrease the length of time between screening colonoscopies. Diverse algorithms were applied to video sequences of laparoscopic colon resections. Surgeons experienced in laparoscopy viewed these sequences to determine the optimal parameters of software-generated modification of the original picture. First clinical experiences were obtained using a second monitor next to the one routinely used in laparoscopy which displayed the augmented contrast. Optical transformation was achieved in real time mode and could be switched off according to the surgeon?s preference. Results: The visual transformation allows a clear distinction of layers which implies a facilitation in preparation for the untrained surgeon and the experienced surgeon facing a difficult situs, respectively. This, in return, entails positive effects for both the patient with regard to the perioperative risk and the surgeon for whom the procedure becomes less stressful in certain situations. The stated factors will be evaluated in a prospective randomised trial to verify the estimated effects. Furthermore, the preparation of the rectum may be another procedure in which the application could be advantageous. Conclusion: The results for the application of the transforming software obtained to this point appear to be very promising. Particularly, the mobilisation of the left sided hemicolon and the rectum may be faster and safer which constitutes a benefit for the patient. The aim of stoma in patients who had left colonic or rectal resection for cancer is to limit the consequences of anastomotic leakage. We retrospectively analyzed the short-term outcome of patients who had ileostomy reversal in this setting. Patients who had initial laparoscopic cancer resection were compared to those who had the same procedure openly. Duodenal neoplasms are rare and range from benign lesions that can be treated with endoscopic techniques to adenocarcinoma that often requires surgical resection. The purpose of this project was to evaluate the incidence, diagnosis, treatment, and outcomes of duodenal neoplasms at a large tertiary-care hospital. A retrospective review was conducted (2002) (2003) (2004) (2005) (2006) (2007) . Patients were identified from the gastrointestinal tumor registry at our institution. Medical records were examined for demographics, treatments, complications, and outcomes. Twenty patients were identified with primary duodenal neoplasms. The overall incidence of duodenal neoplasms in the GI tumor registry was 10.6%. The mean age was 64 years (range, 47 -87 years) with 45% of patients being male. The most common presenting symptoms were weight loss (35%) and nausea and vomiting (41%). Of the 20 duodenal neoplasms, 13 were adenocarcinomas and 7 were carcinoid tumors. Methods of diagnosis included upper gastrointestinal series (58%), esophagogastroduodenoscopy (63%) and CT scan (53%), with 10 patients having more than one diagnostic study. All neoplasms in the 3rd and 4th portion of the duodenum were adenocarcinomas. The majority of patients were diagnosed with Stage IV disease (n = 8). Surgical therapy was undertaken in 45% of patients (n = 9) and ranged from local excision (n = 6) to pancreaticoduodenectomy (n = 1). 66% of patients (n = 6) that underwent surgery had negative surgical margins and one of these patients had a recurrence 2 years postoperatively. Additionally, 40% of patients (n = 8) received no therapy (surgery, radiation, or chemotherapy). Overall 3-year mortality rate was 50% and 70% for surgical and nonsurgical patients respectively. 3-year mortality was 75% for patients receiving no therapy. Duodenal neoplasms remain a rare entity. We found the majority of these tumors were adenocarcinomas and were diagnosed by EGD. The majority of the patients in our series did not receive surgical therapy as a result of metastatic disease at initial diagnosis. Discussion: Despite similar rates of neoadjuvant therapy in both groups and resections at the same rectal height, we found significantly fewer defunctioning stomas were constructed, no drains inserted and no significant increase in anastomotic dehiscence in the laparoscopic anterior resections. Total theatre time (more accurately reflecting surgical theatre efficiency) between OAR and LAR is not significantly different, countering the historical argument quoted against laparoscopic resections. We feel that reducing the use of stomas and drains is likely to reduce morbidity and increase patient satisfaction without compromising safety. Therefore, our study further promotes the benefits of a laparoscopic approach to anterior resection. Introduction: Colon anastomosis is a frequently used technique.Decreasing oxidative substances may prevent surgeon from complications.We investigated the efficacy of N-acetyl cysteine(NAC) as an antioxidant, Ebselen as a peroxide reducer and 1400 W as an inducible nitricoxide synthetase(INOS) inhibitor on ischemic and non-ischemic colon anastomosis. Methods and procedures; 90 Sprague-Dawley rats were used. Study design as follows;1)non-ischemic control group,2)ischemic control group,3)non-ischemic NAC group,4)ischemic NAC group,5)non-ischemic ebselen group,6) ischemic ebselen group,7)nonischemic 1400 W group,8)ischemic 1400 W group. NAC:150 mg/kg, Ebselen:50 mg/kg, 1400 W:10 mg/kg were given intraperitoneally for 4 days after colonic surgery. Postoperative 5th day, relaporotomy were performed, anostomotic bursting strength were measured and hydroxypyroline,malondialdehyde(MDA), superoxidedismutase(SOD),glutathioneperoxidae(GPx) were assayed. Results; Bursting strength and hydroxypyroline levels were increased(p < 0.01) and MDA, SOD levels were significantly decreased (p < 0.01) in ischemic and non-ischemic 1400 W groups. Conclusion; Inhibition of INOS enzyme to prevent NOS induced oxidative stress is beneficial for anostomotic healing. [Background] Laparoscopic surgery for the colonic diverticulitis has following unique aspects that are different from surgery for colonic cancer, 1) Due to the inflammation of the bowel and mesocolon, it is difficult to keep proper dissectional plane, 2) resection of long-segmental colon usually needs to mobilize the splenic flexure for the safe anastomosis, 3) complicated inflammation sometimes requires Hartmann procedure or additional segmental resection of adjacent organs, 4) In Hartmann reversal, adhesions of the small bowel and the rectal stump is hard to release under the laparoscope. In this study, we summarize the results and discuss the advantage of Handassisted laparoscopic surgery for colon diverticulitis. [Patients and methods] Seven patients (2: right-sided, 5: left-sided) operated under the laparoscope. For sigmoid diverticulitis, 8 cm lower midline incision was made first, and dissection or resection was performed under the direct vision as possible. Remaining mobilization of mesocolon, and splenic flexure were performed with hand assistance. GelPort was usually used to maintain pneumoperitoneum during HALS. In the reversal operation, take-down of stoma was performed first and GelPort was attached to the stoma wound. [Results] All operations for right-sided colon diverticulitis could be accomplished by laparoscope without unexpected conversion. In left-sided cases, 2 patients were carried out by laparoscope only (operative time; 256 and 365 min) and 2 patients were operated by HALS (165 and 200 min). Reversal surgery for Hartmann procedure was performed by HALS for one patient (205 min). [Conclusion] In the primary surgery or reversal procedure for colonic diverticulitis, our technique of HALS is effective and shortens the operative time. Background: Rectal prolapse in the pediatric population is usually a benign and self-limited condition. We present a rare case of severe recurrent rectal prolapse on a 13-year-old patient associated with a redundant sigmoid colon treated with laparoscopic resection. Case Presentation: A 13-year-old male presented with a five-year history of chronic intermittent rectal prolapse requiring digital reduction on a daily basis. The patient did not have any other co-morbid conditions. Only after manual reduction of the 5-10 cm prolapsed rectum the patient was able to evacuate stool. Preoperative workup, including colonoscopy, contrast enema, anal manometry, defecogram, and sitz marker study, demonstrated an elongated, redundant sigmoid colon with significant prolapse of the sigmoid and rectum through the pelvic floor. With straining, the defecogram also demonstrated the development of a prominent fold in the upper rectum at the level of the peritoneal reflection. Non-operative treatment with stool softeners, Miralax, and bio-feedback failed to provide any improvement. The patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic sigmoid colon resection with side-to-side stapled anastomosis. Approximately 13 centimeters sigmoid were resected eliminating the ?accordion? effect caused by the redundant sigmoid. A rectopexy was unnecessary as the remaining distal sigmoid and rectum were tethered to the pelvis. The patient was discharged on post-operative day one and his rectal prolapse has completely resolved. He now has normal bowel movement without the use of any laxatives. Conclusion: We present a rare case of redundant sigmoid colon causing constipation and rectal prolapse in a pediatric patient. This is the first reported pediatric case successfully treated with laparoscopic sigmoid resection. The research is supported by a fund from the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No: 07DZ1950) Objective: To investigate the clinical and pathological characteristics of locally advanced rectal carcinoma and identification of the candidates for neoadjuvant chemoradiation (nCRT). Summary Background data: So far the nCRT has been the standard care for locally advanced rectal cancer (T3-4 or/and N1-2 lesions). But the accuracy of staging examinations (mainly ERUS and MRI) is far from excellent. Besides, such examinations or professionals are not available in many hospitals in China, while the colonoscopy and biopsy are routinely obtained before surgery. Methods: This is a retrospective study. Patients who were treated for rectal cancer with total mesorectal excision (TME) technique at Changhai hospital from January 1999 to July 2008 were identified from our prospectively collected database. Patient?s characteristics, colonoscopy records, operative and pathologic reports were reviewed. Exclusion criteria were recurrent rectal tumors, tumors receiving nCRT, stage IV tumors, synchronous multiple colorectal carcinomas and the patients with incomplete information. Result: Totally 1005 cases were included in this research and 761 cases were identified as locally advanced rectal cancer (T3-4 or/and N1-2 lesions) depending on postoperative TNM stage. The investigated factors included: gender, age, primary symptoms, period of symptom, synchronous polyps, CEA, CA19-9, tumor distance from the anal verge, tumor circumferential extent, tumor type, tumor size and differentiation. The results from a univariate analysis showed that nine factors were associated significantly with locally advanced rectal cancer: primary symptoms, synchronous polyps, CEA, CA19-9, tumor distance from the anal verge, tumor circumferential extent, tumor type, tumor size and differentiation. Furthermore, a multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed and indicated seven independent risk factors as followed. Introduction: The objective of this study is to evaluate the accuracy of pre-operative colonoscopic localization of colonic lesions. Localization of the colonic lesion plays a key role in determining the type of operation a patient may require. Inaccurate localization may result in removal of the wrong segment of colon and/or a change in the operation performed. Methods: A retrospective review of patients who had a colon resection by a single surgeon after pre-operative colonoscopic localization from 1991 to 2008 was performed. A comparison of the preoperative colonoscopic and final intraoperative localization was made. Clinical and demographic information was gathered to determine accuracy rates overall and by colon region, and to attempt to identify predictive factors. Results: 374 patients were included in this study. 184 (49%) were male. The mean age was 61.6 years. 362 patients (97%) underwent colon resection for colorectal cancer. 15 patients (0.27%) were found to have non-concordant colonoscopic and intra-operative findings. 14 or 15 (87%) were being resected for colorectal cancer, and 1 for inflammatory bowel disease. 7 (47%) lesions were inaccurately localized in the sigmoid colon, 4 (27%) in the descending colon, 2 (13%) in the ascending colon, 1 (7%) in the rectum and 1 (7%) lesion was not visualized by colonoscopy preoperatively. 11 of the 15 patients (73%) with non-concordant localization had a modification of their planned operative procedure. Due to non-concordant intraoperative localization, 10 patients underwent a different segmental colectomy than planned preoperatively, and 1 patient underwent an extended resection. Conclusions: Preoperative colonoscopic localization of colorectal lesions was surprisingly accurate (99.8%) in this large series of patients undergoing colon resection. The majority of inaccurately identified lesions occur in the sigmoid and descending colon. Incorrect localization, even though not terribly common, can result in significant changes in intraoperative plan and ultimate outcome. Therefore even though this is not common, every effort should be made to localize the lesion before surgery, especially when thought to be in the left or sigmoid colon, to reduce the need for intraoperative localization efforts, for an intraoperative change in procedure, and for a surprise for the patient after surgery. Objective: To investigate the feasibility of laparoscopic total mesorectal excision (TME) in mid-lower rectal cancers following neoadjuvant chemoradiation (nCRT). Summary Background data: The laparoscopic approach for colon cancer has been widely accepted. A few studies have shown that there are advantages of laparoscopic over open TME surgery for rectal cancer. However, the role of laparoscopy has not been clearly defined specifically in cases following nCRT. Methods: All patients with rectal cancer who underwent nCRT were identified; no operations for rectal carcinoma were performed laparoscopically prior to 2005. The laparoscopic cases were matched to open cases based on gender, procedure, age and BMI. The medical records were reviewed and short term outcome was compared between these two groups. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS? 15 software. Results: Between 2002 and 2008, 64 patients were identified; including 32 laparoscopic cases and 32 open cases. There was no difference between the two groups based on gender, procedure, age, BMI, or ASA classification. The procedures performed within each group included 8 abdominoperineal resections and 24 anterior resections, which included 20 colonic J-pouch-anal anastomoses and 4 straight coloanal anastomoses. In the laparoscopic group, 12 received totally laparoscopic operations, 12 were either laparoscopic-assisted or hand-assisted procedures, and 8 were converted. The reasons for conversion included bleeding, splenic injury, and difficult anatomy. There was no difference in comorbidities, tumor location, tumor size, tumor stage,or radiation dose between the two groups. Operative time was longer in the laparoscopic group(205 ± 49 vs 267 ± 76 minutes, p < 0.001). Operative blood loss, complication rate, and mortality rate were all similar between the two groups. However, the laparoscopic group benefited from shorter length of stay(7.6 ± 2.3 vs 6.1 ± 2.4, p = 0.012), earlier first bowel movement(3.3 ± 2.4 vs 1.9 ± 1, p = 0.006), and shorter time to regular diet(5.8 ± 2.5 vs 3.9 ± 2.1, p = 0.003). There was no difference in lymph node harvest (both positive node harvest and total lymph node harvest), distal margin, and circumferential margin. Conclusions: In our experience, laparoscopic TME for mid-lower rectal cancer is feasible and safe. Patients benefit from the short-term advantages of laparoscopy, including shorter length of hospital stay, time to tolerating a regular diet, and time to first bowel movement or stoma function. Although there were no short-term differences in oncologic parameters, the long-term oncologic outcome requires further investigation. Purpose: Laparoscopic proctectomy is still controversial, especially for lower rectal cancer. This study assessed laparoscopic proctectomy for extraperitoneal rectal cancer. Patients: Thirty four consecutive laparoscopic proctectomy for extraperitoneal rectal cancer were enrolled since 2002 to 2008. Mean age was 64.4 year-old, they were 21 males and 13 females. Procedures were; low anterior resection (LAR) with stapling anastomosis: 20, intersphincteric resection (ISR): 13, Hartmann: 1. Lymph node dissection was; D3 (from origin of the IMA): 12, D2 (from LCA): 22. Preoperative diagnosis was; T1: 22, T2: 9, T3: 3. There were no case with preoperative radiation therapy. Diverting stoma was made in 11/13 of ISR and in 8/20 of LAR. Technique: Regarding very low anterior resection and ISR, intersphinteric space was opened by laparoscopic approach. Generally anorectal ring is well-confirmed and dissected easily. This technique is very useful for ISR to diminish the anal work near cancer. Also for very low anterior resection, linear stapling is easier after intersphincteric mobilization. Results: Mean operating time was 327 minutes. According to procedures, operating time of LAR was 316 min. and that of ISR was 354 min. Mean blood loss was 119 g in overall, 104 g in LAR and 143 g in ISR. No patients needed blood transfusion. Median postoperative hospital stay was 10 days in overall, 9 days in LAR and 11 days in ISR. There were two leakages in LAR (10%).and no leakage in ISR. Postoperative ileus was seen in each one case of both LAR and ISR. Urinary dysfunction with transient selfcatheterization was also seen in one case each. There was no mortality. One local recurrence was detected in T3 patients. Conclusion: Laparoscopic proctectomy for lower rectal cancer is feasible and safe in T1 and T2 patients. Introduction: The American Geriatric Society divides the population of people over 65 years of age into 3 groups: ?young old? aged 65-74, ?middle old? aged 75-84 and ?old old? aged more than 85. The aim of this study was to asses the feasibility and safety of laparoscopic surgery for elderly patients. Methods: Patients aged 65 and older were retrospectively identified from a prospective data base. General demographic information as well as related variants served as a basis for this report. Results: From January 2001 to August 2008, 423 patients aged 65 to 95 years underwent laparoscopic surgery. These patients were divided into 3 groups: 65-74 years of age (n = 226), 75-84 years of age (n = 163) and ± 85 years of age (n = 34). Surgical indications included adenocarcinoma (n = 149), colonic polyps (n = 100), diverticular disease (n = 80) and others. Procedures included right hemicolectomy (n = 161), sigmoidectomy (n = 82), anterior resection (n = 28), ileocolic resection (n = 14), abdomino-perineal resection (n = 9) and others. Procedures were elective in 90.4% (n = 382). The average length of hospital stay for the ?young?, ?middle? and ?old? groups were 6.7 days, 8.2 days and 11.4 days respectively (p < 0.002 for all groups) and the mortality rates were 0.5% (n = 1), 2% (n = 3) and 3% (n = 1) respectively. The major morbidity rates were 1% (n = 3), 2.4% (n = 4) and 3% (n = 1) respectively. The length of ICU admission was 3.5 days for the ?young? group and 7 days for the ?old? group (p = 0.05). Conclusions: Although laparoscopic colorectal surgery is feasible in elderly patients, as age advances morbidity, length of ICU and overall hospital stay significantly increase from 65 to > 85 years of age. Background and aim: Although LAG has not become a standard procedure because of its technical difficulties, it is necessary to show that clinical results after LAG are similar to those after open gastrectomy. Aim was to study perioperative and long-term results after LAG. Methods: During March, 2000-June, 2008, we performed LAG for 232 patients who were preoperatively diagnosed to have gastric cancer with T1 or T2 without lymph node metastasis. The mobilization of the stomach and lymph node dissection were carried out under laparoscope, then, removal of the specimen and reconstruction were performed with small skin incision of 5-8 cm length. Performed procedures were, distal gastrectomy (DG) for 174 cases, proximal gastrectomy (PG) for 26 cases, and total gastrectomy (TG) for 32 cases. We studied operation time, intraoperative blood loss, postoperative complications, and postoperative hospital stay as perioperative results. Rate of postoperative recurrence was also investigated. Results: Mean operation time (min) was 267 for DG, 259 for PG, and 356 for TG. Intraoperative blood loss (ml) was 51 for DG, 58 for PG, and 90 for TG. Postoperative complications were observed in 8 patients (3.4%). We converted LAG to open gastrectomy in 2 patients, and following complications were observed in 1 patient, respectively; surgical site infection, anastomotic leakage, intraabdominal abscess, anastomotic hemorrhage, aspiration pneumoniae, and incisional hernia. The average hospital stay was 13 days. No patients had recurrence except for 3 patients who died of recurrent disease. Conclusions: Intraoperative blood loss of LAG was considered much less than open conventional gastrectomy. We believe that morbidity and mortality rate after LAG was comparable to or even better than that after open gastrectomy. We were able to obtain excellent results by performing fine and polite procedures under good operation field and thus making blood loss as few as possible. Conclusion:Small intestinal lymphoma is not unusual in developing countries, males are the majority,2nd and 4th decade has more common incidence.LDH is not high at the time of initial diagnosis but raises at the time of recurrence.MALT lymphoma has more incidence of recurrence and the overall prognosis is good. Background: Recent studies have shown improved outcomes following laparoscopic colorectal surgery when compared to open laparotomy for the operations of benign and malignant colorectal diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The aim of this study was to evaluate the results of laparoscopic colorectal resections in normal weight patients compared to overweight and obese patients with IBD. Methods: After IRB approval, a retrospective analysis of a prospectively accrued surgical data-base was performed. 194 consecutive patients with IBD who underwent laparoscopic resections from January 1st 2000 to April 30th 2008 were reviewed. Weight status, surgical technical factors and 60 day post-operative complications were reviewed. Chi square and Student T -tests were used. Results: Normal weight (Group I) included BMI (18.5-24.9 Kg/m2) 117 patients. Group II included overweight BMI (25-29.9Kg/m2) 60 patients and obese BMI (± 30 Kg/m2) 17 patients. Crohn?s Disease was diagnosed in 76 (64%) for Group I and 42 (54%) in Group II. Procedures performed included ileocolic resection in 52% of patients in Group I, and 52% in Group II. Total colectomy with or without restoration occurred in 40% in Group I, and 45.5% in Group II. The conversion rate for Group I was 20% and 26% for Group II (p > 0.005, ns). The most common reason for conversion was failure to progress due to adhesions or phlegmon. There was no difference in major postoperative complication rates (wound infection, or abscess, or anastomotic leakage, or small bowel obstruction), or in mean hospital stay (7.0, 6.8, respectively). There was no mortality. Conclusions: There were no significant differences in the rates of conversion, major postoperative complication, or length of stay between normal weight, or overweight and obese patients with IBD. Patients? weight did not affect outcomes after laparoscopic surgery for IBD. Sherief Shawki, MD, Rodrigo Pinto MD, Jacobo Kirsch MD, Kazuhiro Narita MD, Eric Weiss MD, Steven Wexner MD, Cleveland Clinic Florida Computerized tomography scan (CT) is an important tool in evaluation and assessment of diverticulitis disease. Previous Studies demonstrated different approaches depending on CT scan findings, which vary from clinic treatment to guided drainage or even urgent surgery. The aim of this study was to find out if CT findings have any predictive value for conversion in laparoscopic surgery for diverticulitis. Methodology: After IRB approval, we identified all the patients who had laparoscopic surgery for diverticulitis who had a pre-operative CT performed, between 2001 CT performed, between & 2008 CT was interpreted by a radiologist blinded to intraoperative findings and outcomes. CT findings were examined for their predictive value of conversion overall, within 1, 2, and > 2 months as well as before and after 2004 Fisher?s exact test and chi2 were used to assess statistical significance. Results: A total of 161 patients (91 males) were included in this study. The mean age was of 56 (range 24-83) years, and the mean BMI was 27.8 (range17.5-34.5), and ASA I-21, II-115, and III-26 patients respectively. The conversion rate was 24% (40/161); 33 due to failure to progress as a result of phlegmon, abscess, or dense adhesions, and in 4 patients due to the length of incision > 10 cm (due to bulky specimen), in 2 due to difficult anatomy and in 1 due to bleeding . CT findings were positive in 74% of patients (n = 119); 100% with bowel thickening and/or fat stranding, 23.5% air bubbles in the colonic wall or surrounding fat, 11.75% phlegmon, 30.2% abscesses, and 10.2% fistulas. 48, 51 and 62 patients had their CT done within1, 2 and > 2 months of operation respectively. The timing of CT either before or after 2004, or based upon 1, 2 or > 2 months from surgery were not significant predictors of conversion (p > 0.05). However, the presence of abscess or air bubbles in the colonic wall and/or surrounding fat were statistically associated with conversion when found within 2 months of operation (p < 0.05) Conclusions: The presence of abscess and/or air bubbles was significant predictor of conversion during laparoscopy for diverticulitis. Dan Geisler BA, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Laparoscopy has gained acceptance for the treatment of many colorectal disorders. However, the reality that laparoscopic cases are often time consuming and take longer than the conventional open approach has led to speculation that increased operative time may negatively affect the overall patient outcome. We examine all laparoscopic cases performed by a single surgeon (N = 512) in a prospectively maintained database to determine if increased operative time negatively impacts patient outcome with regards to EBL, length of stay, and overall morbidity and mortality. Between September 2005 and August 2008, 96 patients (18.75%) underwent laparoscopic colorectal procedures with an operative time greater than or equal to 5 hours (300 -623 minutes). The most common diagnosis were rectal cancer (N = 29), ulcerative colitis (N = 24), colon cancer (N = 10), diverticulitis (N = 9), familial adenomatous polyposis (N = 7), Crohn?s disease (N = 6), motility disorder (N = 4), rectal prolapse (N = 3), GI bleeding (N = 1) and other (N = 3). The mean EBL was 323 mL (10 -1500) and no cases were converted to open. There were no mortalities. Overall morbidity was 31%; UTI/ urinary retention (N = 11), wound infection (N = 7), ileus (N = 6), leak (N = 3), abscess (N = 3), DVT (N = 2), pneumonia, atelectasis, fistula, and post-op bleed (N = 1 each). The average length of stay was 7.8 days (3 -70) with 70% of patients discharged by POD 6. Length of operation is not associated with adverse patient outcomes. In experienced hands, the potential need for a longer operative time should not deter the use of a laparoscopic approach as the benefits of minimally invasive surgery continue to show benefits over an open operation even when operative times exceed 5 hours. Methods: Seventy-five cases were enrolled in this study from May 2002 to October 2007 at Qilu Hospital, including 33 cases undergoing LRR and 42 cases undergoing ORR. There were no obvious clinical differences between the two groups. The data of the two groups were compared in terms of blood loss (EBL), operative (OR) time, complications, operation recovery, and hospital expenses. Results: All cases in LRR were successful, with only one case converted to open surgery. In the LRR group: mean OR time was 200 min (150 to 300 min); mean EBL was 100 ml (30 to 400 ml); bowel movement returned in 36 hours on average (24 to 50 hrs); incision infection developed in four cases; the mean lymph node harvest (LN) was 10.9 (4 to 20); and mean hospital stay (LOS) was 10.8 days (7 to 19 days). In the ORR group: mean OR time was 140 min (90 to 210 min); EBL was 170 ml (80 to 500 ml); bowel movement returned in 48 hours (36 to 72hrs); incision infection developed in four cases; the mean LN was 12.3 (4 to 19); and mean LOS was 14.5 days (9 to 22 days). Comparison of group data in terms of EBL, OR time, complications, and operation recovery (P < 0.01) establishes significant differences; however, hospital expenses in the laparoscopic group were higher than in the open group (20.5 thousand yuan RMB vs 17.6 thousand yuan RMB, P < 0.05). The follow-up time in the two groups, including 30 cases (90.9%) in the laparoscopic group and 38 cases (95%) in the open operation group, ranged from 1 to 60 months, with a mean of 31 months. The recurrence and overall survival rates were 30.0% and 80.0% in the LRR group, with no significant difference compared to those of the ORR group (28.5% and 77.8%), (P > 0.05). Conclusion: The radical resection of rectal carcinoma by laparoscopy is safe and feasible. One advantage is the assurance of a smaller incision in LRR. That laparoscopy produces the same outcome as the conventional open approach is suggested by the similarity between rates of overall recurrence and survival in both groups. To verify the advantages of laparoscopy, further study of oncologic outcomes as well as a cost analysis should be undertaken. Purpose: Traditionally, complicated diverticulitis with fistula formation was thought to be a contraindication to performing laparoscopic sigmoid resection and was performed with an open procedure. As experience in laparoscopic surgery increased, more complex surgery was performed laparoscopically in selective patients. Since 2004, our institution has been offering laparoscopic colectomy to all elective patients presenting with diverticulitis including diverticular fistulas. This is a study evaluating the outcomes for consecutive patients who had complicated diverticulitis with fistula formation who underwent elective laparoscopic sigmoid colectomy. Methods: All patients with diverticular disease with fistula formation from 2004-2008 were offered laparoscopic colectomy. Data for this patient population were collected by chart review and analyzed retrospectively. Results: Between November 2004 and September 2008, 22 patients (13 females and 9 males) with an average age of 59 years were identified. All cases were managed by one of two colorectal surgeons at one institution. One male patient was excluded from the study because of a diagnosis of a colon cancer at the time of surgery. Of the 21 patients in the study all had fistulae including, 12 colovesical fistulas, 4 colovaginal fistulas, 3 enterocolonic fistulas, and 2 colocutaneous fistulas. The mean operative time was 185 minutes, and the conversion rate to an open procedure was 19% (4/21). A total of 4 early postoperative complications occurred in 3 patients including ileus (n = 2), and pneumonia (n = 1). Late complications were experienced in 2 patients, both with wound infection (n = 2). Conclusion: Laparoscopic colectomy for all patients presenting with diverticular fistulas is safe with minimal morbidity and an acceptable conversion rate. We believe that a laparoscopic approach should be offered to all patients who present with complicated diverticulitis with fistula formation for elective sigmoid colectomy. INTRODUCTION: TEM is a natural orifice minimally invasive treatment option used to excise a variety of rectal lesions. The procedure requires dilatation of the anal canal to allow placement of the 40 mm operating scope, which has the potential for overstretching the sphincter musculature. This combined with partial resection of the rectum and the subsequent loss of rectal volume and compliance creates a concern regarding anorectal function postoperatively. Data regarding patient satisfaction with their anorectal function is scant. METHODS: A prospectively maintained database of 171 consecutive patients undergoing TEM from 1997 to 2007 was queried to identify TEM patients to survey using the fecal incontinence quality of life scale (Wexner?s Scale) questionnaire. This is a list of 29 questions that are grouped together to test lifestyle, coping, depression and embarrassment secondary to accidental bowel leakage. Higher score represents better function. Thirty patients were deceased and thirty five patients were missing addresses, leaving 106 patients for survey. 20 of the questionnaires did not reach the designated patients leaving a group of 86 patients. Patient satisfaction outcomes were conferred by age (< 75 versus > 75), disease status (cancer versus benign), tumor level in the rectum (< 4 cm versus > 4 cm), excision method (submucosal versus full thickness) and radiation treatment (yes or no). RESULTS: 57 of 86 patients responded (66%). Demographics were as follows: gender: 25 women, 32 men; mean age: 62 years (29 -88); 42 benign diseases, 15 cancers; mean level in the rectum: 5.2 cm (0 -17); 14 underwent preoperative radiation, mean dose 4983 cGy (4000-5580 cGy). For lifestyle, coping, depression, embarrassment, respectively, the group scored 2.28, 3.5, 3.1 and 3.4. Patients who underwent submucosal excision (n = 7) scored better on the lifestyle scale compared to the FTLE patients (3.4 vs. 2.1, p = 0.002). Younger patients scored better on coping than older patients (3.6 vs. 3.2, p = 0.03). Cancer patients scored lower on depression (2.7 vs. 3.5, p = 0.001) and coping (3.2 vs. 3.7, p = 0.03). There was no difference between groups based on level of the lesion in the rectum or whether radiation therapy was used. CONCLUSION: A patient response based questionnaire study following TEM suggests that TEM as a treatment option results in high patient satisfaction with their fecal continence. Younger patients and those undergoing submucosal excision fared better. Surprisingly, low lesions and radiation treatment did not impact patient fecal continence satisfaction after TEM. Amanda J Kravetz MD, Douglas M Iddings DO,Michael A Kia DO, Mclaren Regional Med Ctr, Genesys Regional Med Ctr OBJECTIVES: Single port access surgery is an emerging technique in laparoscopic surgery. Currently outcome data is limited for a majority of procedures. We present the largest series of single port appendectomy performed for acute appendicitis. Methods: Over a 5 month period, ten consecutive patients presenting with appendicitis underwent single-port appendectomy using the Tri-Port multiport (Advanced Surgical). The procedures were all performed through the umbilicus. Retrospectively, patient characteristics and operative outcomes were evaluated. Results: The average age of our patients was 34 and the majority of patients were male (6/10). Average BMI of our patients was 29.4. The mean total operative time time was 68 minutes with an incision size of 1.5 cm in the umbilicus. No postoperative complications occured. No additional trocars or conversions to open were required. Conclusions: Preliminary measures of the outcomes of single port appendectomy reflect that this is an effective and feasible laparoscopic approach. In addition to the obvious cosmetic benefit, patients may benefit from decreased pain and hernia rates. Nicolas Rotholtz MD, Mariano Laporte MD, Sandra Lencinas MD, Maximiliano Bun MD, Laura Aued MD, Norberto Mezzadri, Hospital Aleman de Buenos Aires PURPOSE: Although the use of laparoscopy for the management of postoperative complications has been previously well documented for different pathologies, there is scarce information regarding its use after laparoscopic colorectal surgery. METHODS: Data were prospectively collected from all patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal surgery between June 2000 to October 2007. Patients were divided into two groups according to the approach used for the reoperation: laparoscopy (Group I) or laparotomy (Group II). Data were statistically analyzed by using Student?s t-test and chi-squared test. RESULTS: In all, 510 patients were analyzed. Twenty-seven patients (5.2 percent), 14 men and 13 women (men/women Group I: 10/7 vs. Group II: 4/6; P = not significant (NS)), required a second surgery because of postoperative complications (Group I: 17 (63 percent); Group II: 10 (37 percent)). Mean age was 60 ± 17 years (Group I: 61.7 ± 17.7 vs. Group II: 57.1 ± 16 years; P = NS). Fifteen patients (55.5 percent) hadanastomotic leaks (Group I 13/17 (76.5 percent) vs. Group II 2/13 (15 percent); P = 0.004). The were no differences between the groups regarding the length of stay or postoperative complications (Group I: 11.9 ± 9.6 vs. Group II: 18.1 ± 19.7 days: P = NS; Group I: 1 vs. Group II: 3; P = NS). CONCLUSIONS: Laparoscopic approach is a useful tool for treating complications after laparoscopic colorectal surgery, especially anastomotic leaks. Randomized, controlled trials are necessary to validate these findings. KEY WORDS: Relaparoscopy; Laparoscopic colorectal surgery. Introduction: The optimal treatment of hemorrhoids remains an active topic in the surgical community. New technology and approaches have offered potentially less traumatic and painful treatment for symptomatic hemorrhoid disease. This study was designed to compare the surgical outcomes and costs of hemorrhoidectomy performed by a new bipolar vessel sealer device EnSeal? with those performed by conventional hemorrhoidectomy. Methods: We, retrospectively, compared 38 consecutive patients undergoing EnSeal? triple hemorrhoidectomy within the last two years with a historical cohort of 38 consecutive patients who underwent conventional hemorrhoidectomy, all by the same surgeon. Demographics, operative time, recovery room time, postoperative complications, and cost were collected and compared between the two groups. Statistical analysis was performed using student t test. Results: The two groups were comparable in terms of age, and female to male ratio. The average operative time was 21.3 minutes for the EnSeal? group and 28.1 minutes for the conventioanl group (P < 0.001). The average recovery room time was 77.9 minutes for the EnSeal? group and 106.8 minutes for the conventional group (P < 0.0005). There was no statistical difference in the average pain score between the two groups in the immediate post operative period before discharge (P < 0.126). The average equipment cost per patient 438.5 $ for the EnSeal? group and 161.5 $ for the conventional group (P < 0.0001) In the EnSeal? group there was one readmission for bleeding. In the conventional group there were two admissions for pain control and one admission for bleeding. Conclusions: EnSeal? provides a safe and superior alternative to conventional hemorrhoidectomy by reducing operative time, postoperative recovery, and post procedure pain. These advantages balance the increased cost of equipments. Introduction: Laparoscopic colectomy has been proven to be an accepted option for the treatment of colorectal cancer. Its application in high-risk patients is still controversial. This study reviewed the outcome of high-risk patients who underwent laparoscopic resection for colorectal neoplasm. Methods: During the study period, data on patients with colorectal resection were collected propectively. In this study, patients who were of ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) Class 3 or above, and underwent laparoscopic resection (LR) for colorectal neoplasm were included. The outcomes of surgery were analyzed and compared with those who underwent open operation (OR). Results: One hundred and thirteen patients (68 men) with a median age of 76.5 years (range 53 -90) were in the LR group. Seventeen of them had previous treatment for other malignancies and 87.6% of patients had concomitant medical diseases. The median was 120 ml and transfusion was required in 7 patients. Conversion was required in 16 patients (14.2%). The median postoperative hospital stay was 6 days (IRQ: 4-9 days). The operative mortality (30 days) was 0.9% and the overall complication rate was 23.9%. When compared with the 230 patients in the OR group, there were no differences in age, gender, site of the tumor, the presence of medical disease, the stage of the cancer and operative mortality. However, complication rate was significantly lower in the LR group (23.9% versus 38.3%, p = 0.01) and hospital stay was also shorter (6 days versus 8 days, p < 0.005) Conclusion: Laparoscopic colorectal resection for the high-risk patients is associated with more outcome than open surgery and should be the preferred option in those patients with significant medical illnesses. Underlying cardiac disease is a major risk factor for abdominal surgery. While laparoscopic colorectal surgery is gaining widespread acceptance, the physiologic effects of a pneumoperitoneum coupled with extreme position changes and a potentially longer operation raise concern regarding the safety and efficacy of a minimally invasive approach in this patient cohort. We examine all laparoscopic cases by a single surgeon to determine how the presence of cardiac comorbidities impacts the perioperative and postoperative course and compare these to a case-matched cohort of patients undergoing conventional open surgery. Between September, 2005 and August, 2008, data relevant to 512 consecutive patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal procedures by a single surgeon were prospectively entered into an IRB-approved laparoscopic database. Major cardiac comorbidities were present in 156 patients (30.5%). Diagnosis included colorectal neoplasia (N = 59), diverticulitis (N = 45), inflammatory bowel disease (N = 24), volvulus (N = 12), and other (N = 16). There were no deaths. 4 cases (2.6%) were converted to open for adhesions (N = 2), bleeding (N = 1), and the presence of a large cancer (N = 1). There were no untoward intraoperative cardiac or pulmonary events. The overall morbidity was 36% (N = 56). Mean length of stay was 6.4 days (1-53). Laparoscopic colorectal surgery is safe in patients with major cardiac comorbidities. The morbidity and mortality in patients undergoing major abdominal surgery is less in patients undergoing laparoscopic colorectal procedures compared to open surgery. In appropriately trained hands, a minimally invasive approach is associated with a decreased incidence of major perioperative morbidity and mortality in patients with underlying cardiac disease. HAND-ASSISTED LAPAROSCOPIC VS. LAPAROSCOPIC TPC IPAA Alex J Ky MD, Erin Ly BA,Randolph Steinhagen MD, Mount Sinai Hospital PURPOSE: This study was designed to compare short-term outcomes after hand-assisted laparoscopic vs. straight laparoscopic total proctocolectomy with ileoanal pullthrough. METHODS: A retrospective study was performed on all PTC IPAA at a single institution by a single surgeon between July 2002 to July 2008. The study was powered to detect a 30-minute reduction in operative time between hand-assisted laparoscopic and straight laparoscopic groups. RESULTS: There were 9 hand-assisted patients and 47 straight laparoscopic patients. There were no differences in the patient age, sex, previous surgery, and procedures performed between the hand-assisted and straight laparoscopic groups. Resident participation in the procedures was similar for both groups. The mean operative time (in minutes) was significantly less in the hand-assisted laparoscopic group versus the straight laparoscopic group (175 +/) 60 vs. 370 +/) 120). There were no apparent differences in the time to return of bowel function, tolerance of diet, narcotic usage, postoperative pain scores or length of stay, between the hand-assisted laparoscopic and straight laparoscopic groups. There was 0 conversion in the hand-assisted laparoscopic group and 4 (9 percent) in the straight laparoscopic group. Complications were less in the hand assisted group than the straight laparoscopic group (0 vs 5). The number of diversion were similar in both groups (6 vs 37) CONCLUSIONS: In this prospective, randomized study, hand-assisted laparoscopic colorectal surgery resulted in significantly shorter operative times and lower complication rate while maintaining similar clinical outcomes as straight laparoscopic techniques for patients undergoing TPC IPAA. Introduction: The two-week rule in United Kingdom was introduced to ensure that all patients with a suspected colorectal cancer (CRC) saw a hospital specialist within 14 days of an urgent GP referral. The usefulness and practicality of such a decision has been questioned. The aims of this study were to measure the compliance to the guidelines and evaluate the effectiveness of such referrals. Methods: All patients who were referred under two week wait target for suspected CRC over six months period were included. Results: A total of 68 referrals were made. Change in bowel habits was the commonest (69%) cause for referral. Most common investigation used was Colonoscopy (54%) followed by Barium Enema (40%). Diverticular disease was the most frequent (35%)condition diagnosed. Forty four percent of referrals did not comply with guidelines. 97% of patients were seen in the clinic within 2 weeks. Three colorectal cancers (4.4%) were diagnosed out of which two were rectal and one was caecal. In addition, during this 6 months period, total of 10 CRCs were diagnosed. Out of this, only 30% were identified through 2-week wait referrals. Average time from referral to diagnosis was 9 weeks. Conclusion: Two week wait referrals identified less than half of patients with bowel cancer in this study. The majority of patients received appointments within two weeks. The number of referrals was not limitless, however a high number of referrals failed to adhere to guidelines. The cancer detection rate was disappointingly low. Introduction: Despite the subjectivity of the method, endoanal ultrasonography (EAUS) is the gold standard to evaluate the external (EAS) and Internal (IAS) anal sphincters. Differentiating a sphincter defect from normal anatomic variation is challenging. We developed a new standardized protocol to evaluate the anal sphincter complex and establish normal values of lengths and thickness of the EAS and IAS for men and women. Methods: 19 nulliparous women and 19 men were recruited to the study. Eligible subjects had no history of anal trauma or surgery. EAUS was done with a 3-dimensional endo-probe and 14 mHz transducer. To minimize recall bias, interpretation of the 3-D ?image blocks? was done by one examiner (JN) at least 3 months after clinical examination and EAUS. We measured the length of the EAS and IAS in the anterior and posterior midlines and the thickness of the muscles at 10 mm from the distal end of the IAS as well as at mid EAS in 4 quadrants (20 measurements per subject). Means and standard deviations were calculated for the measurements and Wilcoxon signed-rank test was used to compare means of the two groups. To account for anatomic variation, a sphincter score was calculated by dividing the anterior lengths by posterior lengths for EAS and IAS. Results: Mean length (mm) of the anterior EAS was 17.2 (sd 3.13) for men and 12.6 (sd 3.08) for women (p = 0.00043) versus posterior lengths of 21. Despite the widespread use of vessel sealing devices in laparoscopic colonic and abdominal surgery, there is little clinical data to support its safety or efficacy with any of the current manufactured devices .A prospective study was conducted using the Enseal Treo by Surg Rx for laparoscopic segmental and total colectomy to evaluate the safety of intracorporeal major pedicle ligation. A total of 125 vessels were divided in 50 consecutive patients undergoing laparoscopic colectomy. Division of named vessels (ileocolic, inferior mesenteric, or middle colic) was documented and recorded digitally. No significant bleeding complications occurred in any of the patients. Three vessels with minimal oozing were successfully resealed. In 2 patients the inferior mesenterc artery had pulsatile bleeding controlled with 5 mm clips. Adequate major vessel ligation was accomplished 98% in 96% of the patients. Conclusions: The Enseal by Surg Rx, is safe and efficacious for major pedicle division in laparoscopic colonic surgery. Technical aspects are critical with minimal tension and slow division being the most important. After video analysis, failures seemed to be most likely secondary to poor technique or atherosclerotic vessels. Using proper surgical technique, in appropriately selected patients the enseal is safe with no adverse outcomes reported in our cohort of patients. A cost benefit also seemed to be demonstrated as there was no need for additional clip appliers or vascular staplers which led to fewer instrument exchanges and quicker operative time. Morbid obesity continues to be a major obstacle in patients undergoing laparoscopic colon surgery. A review of the surgical literature repeatedly demonstrates morbid obesity to be one of the most common causes of conversion in patients undergoing laparoscopic colectomy. Particular troublesome is the fact that it is these patients who perhaps could benefit the most from a laparoscopic approach. A retrospective review was performed of patients who had undergone laparoscopic colectomy in our department to determine whether the HALS technique could be successfully performed in morbidly obese patients without significant conversion rates, while maintaining the benefits of laparoscopy. From 2004-2008, four hundred patients underwent laparoscopic sigmoid resection, anterior resection, total colectomy, or restorative proctocolectomy. Of this group, 40 were categorized as being morbidly obese (bmi > 40), with a mean BMI of 42.5. Length of stay, wound infection, incisional hernia, anastomotic dehiscence, PE/DVT, as well as pulmonary complications was calculated. Conclusions: In all 40 patients, HALS was completed through a 7.5 -8 cm pfannensteil incision without any conversion (extension of the original incision or conversion to midline). Morbidly obese patients displayed significant benefits of a minimally invasive approach with a lengthy of stay of 4.1 days. Wound infections occurred in 6% of the patients. At 2 years follow up there were 0 incisional hernias. No anastomotic leaks occurred. 1 patient developed a pulmonary embolism despite postoperative prophylaxis and an IVC filter. No patients required an ICU admission, mechanical ventilation or documented pulmonary infection. In our experience, hand assisted laparoscopic colectomy in morbidly obese patients, maintains all advantages of minimal access surgery. We recommend HALS colectomy as a primary technique for morbidly obese patients undergoing colectomy whom are not amenable to laparoscopic techniques or as a first alternative to conversion. Laparoscopic colectomy was performed on 57 patients with UC (subtotal colectomy, ileoanal pouch formation, ileoanal anastomosis, and double-barrel ileostomy). With previous methods, the intestine was mobilized under laparoscopic guidance from cecum to sigmoid colon. Following placement of a median incision on the lower abdomen, the rectum was dissected and anal anastomosis performed by the open method. However all UC patients are surgically treated laparoscopically today. The median time of surgery for the entire patient population was 360 minutes, and oral intake was initiated after an average of 13 days. After the introduction of the present method, the median time of surgery for the entire patient population was 318 minutes, and oral intake was initiated after an average of 5 days. While this low-invasive method that eliminates even small incisional wounds has been performed on only eight patients, it has been associated with less pain from the wound, earlier postoperative recovery, earlier postoperative oral intake, and easier management of the artificial anus in these patients. The present method may become the standard procedure for UC due to its minimal invasiveness. Introduction: We hypothesize that gender, BMI and preoperative chemoradiation may influence the ability to perform a hand-assisted laparoscopic (HAL) resection for patients with rectal cancer. Methods: We performed retrospective analysis of patients who underwent HAL resection of rectal cancer. Four trocars and a standard 7 cm incision length were used. We abstracted clinical and pathological variables to examine conversion rate, number of lymph nodes harvested, radial margin, length of stay, and local recurrence. We performed descriptive analyses and Fishers Exact probability test (2-tailed). Results: Our study evaluated 32 patients (12 females, 20 males) with a mean age of 54.8 years and mean BMI of 26. The mean distance of the rectal cancer from the anal verge was 8 cm. Preoperative chemoradiation was administered to 59% of the patients who had clinical stage III. 24 patients had a low anterior resection while 8 had abdominoperineal resection. The median length of stay was 7 days. A mean of 15 lymph nodes were harvested and the radial and distal resection margins were tumor free for all patients. Histopathology showed that 71% were T3 lesions and 47% had lymph node metastases. In 9 (34%) patients the operation was converted to open and 25% needed have their incision extended by 2 cm to facilitate pelvic dissection secondary to local tumor bulk. However patients treated with preoperative chemoradiation therapy for clinically stage III rectal cancer were significantly (73% vs 30%, p = 0.01) likely to require conversion or extension of incision. Gender and BMI did not influence conversion rate or rate of incision extension. Conclusions: In our initial experience of HAL rectal resection, we noted that preoperative chemoradiation therapy for clinically stage III increased the conversion rate and the need to extend the incision. Background: Laparoscopic splenectomy has become the surgical procedure of choice in the therapy of various hematologic diseases. Portal vein thrombosis (PVT) is a well known complication of splenectomy, but the true incidence is not well established with several reports of up to 50% incidence. Massive splenomegaly is considered a risk factor for developing post operative PVT. The aim of this study was to assess PVT incidence after laparoscopic splenectomy for massive splenomegaly in our institution. Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGB) is the most common bariatric surgical procedure performed in the United States. Small bowel obstruction following LRYGB is a common complication often caused by adhesions, internal hernias, or obstruction at the gastrojejunal or jejuno-jejunal anastomosis. We present a case report of a 38 year old Caucasian female, 36 week gestation, who had previously undergone LRYGB 4 years previous. She was admitted with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. The patient went into labor followed by an uncomplicated vaginal delivery the day following admission. She continued to have abdominal pain and distention without bowel function. A computed tomography scan revealed a small bowel obstruction and the patient was taken to the operating room for diagnostic laparoscopy. Laparoscopy was converted to exploratory laparotomy following the recognition of ischemic bowel. Findings at exploratory laparotomy included a volvulus of the jejuno-jejunal anastomosis with ischemic small bowel requiring resection of the anastomosis and reconfiguration of her jejuno-jejunostomy. The patient had an uncomplicated recovery and was discharged home on postoperative day 6 with good bowel function. Bowel obstruction following vaginal delivery is rare entity with few reported cases. Displacement of abdominal viscera by a gravid uterus may be an inciting event for bowel obstructions in patients that have undergone LRYGB. This case highlights the need for the general surgeon and obstetrician?s familiarity with bariatric surgery operations and their complications. In the laparoscopy group 3 of these 6 patients required reoperation for inflammatory bowel obstruction, abdominal abscess and eventration after conversion to a midline laparotomy. 2 patients were treated by needle aspiration or antibiotics alone for abscess. In the McBurney group 2 patients were reoperated on (laparoscopy for bowel obstruction and open abdominal abscess drainage), one patient had prolonged antibiotherapy and another was diagnosed with Crohns disease. There was no fatal complication. The rate of complications and reoperations was not different between the 2 groups. A multivariate analysis did not identify: age, type of procedure (laparoscopy or open), abdominal drainage or prolonged antibiotherapy as a predictor of the outcome. In conclusion, laparoscopic appendectomy has a similar 93.5% favourable outcome when performed for acute appendicitis compared to the open McBurney approach. Liberal use of abdominal drains or prolonged antiobiotherapy is not supported by this retrospective study and does not seem to influence the outcome. Introduction: Before the era of laparoscopic gastric bypass, many bariatric surgeons performed open undivided gastric bypasses(OUGB). The inherent issue with not dividing the stomach is that these patients are prone to staple line failure and gastrogastric fistula formation. Gastrogastric fistulas can lead to reflux, pain, marginal ulceration of the gastrojejunostomy, and weight regain. Any of these symptoms are an indication to repair these fistulas. Herein, we examine the feasibility of laparoscopic division of the stomach to repair gastrogastric fistula after OUGB, despite previous open surgery. Methods: Patients presenting to our office with pain or weight gain following OUGB were evaluated with upper gastrointestinal radiographic studies and upper endoscopy. Presence of a gastrogastric fistula was the indication for repair. All procedures were planned by the laparoscopic approach. Patients gave informed consent to divide their stomachs using linear cutting staplers with preservation of their previous gastrojejunostomy. Postoperative complications and short-term weight loss were examined. Results: Five patients presented with symptomatic gastrogastric fistulas from 9/2004 -9/2007. Patients presented 15 months to 14 years after their OUGB. Average BMI on presentation was 40.1. Pre-OUGB weight data was not available in all patients. All procedures were completed by the laparoscopic approach. All patients were discharged from the hospital uneventfully on postoperative day 1 or 2. One patient required return to the hospital and operating room for fever and leukocytosis on postoperative day 5. No leak was present. However, a 0.5 · 2 cm wedge of possible ischemia along the staple line on the excluded stomach was noted and resected. The patient recovered uneventfully. Average weight loss at initial postoperative follow up (1-2 weeks) was 6.4% of total weight. Average weight loss at 1-2 months was 10.8% of total weight. Conclusion: Repair of gastrogastric fistulas following OUGB is safe and feasible by the laparoscopic approach. All patients had some weight loss in the early postoperative period. Introduction: Our aim was to determine the number of bile duct injuries requiring biliary reconstruction after laparoscopic cholecystectomy in England over a 5 year period, and to investigate factors associated with increased risk of bile duct injury. Methods: Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) Data were obtained from the UK Department of Health for a 5 year period from 2001-2006. Patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) and biliary reconstruction were identified using diagnostic codes (OPSC4) and the data analyzed using an MS Access database. Results: The number of cholecystectomies increased year on year from 33569 in 2001/2 to 46243 in 2005/6 and the percentage of emergency cholecystectomies increased over the same time period from 9.47% to 12.28%. The percentage of patients who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy and required subsequent biliary reconstruction was similar (0.22 % 0.25%, 0.24%, 0.21%) in the first 4 years studied, but showed a decrease in the final year (2005/6) to 0.16%. Male sex was significantly associated with bile duct injury requiring biliary reconstruction. Conclusion: Biliary reconstruction following laparoscopic cholecystectomy is rare. There has been a gradual increase in both the total number of laparoscopic cholecystectomies and the number of emergency cholecystectomies performed over the last 5 years in England. Bile duct injury rates do not appear to be increasing and may even be falling, but more data is needed to confirm this trend. Biliary injury is more common in men. The Mini-Gastric Bypass (MGB) is increasingly being adopted in countries around the world (England, France, Spain, Turkey, Lebanon, India, Australia, Taiwan, Columbia etc.) The purpose of this study is to report on the world?s largest experience with the MGB and complications that can be expected following the MGB. Methods: Complications in over 4,584 patients followed for a maximum of 10 years were analyzed. Results: Excess weight loss was excellent (79%). 31.6% of patients reported some complication (Minor in 22.7%, Moderate in 3.7%, Severe -> Hospitalization in 5.2%), Ulcer/Gastritis and Anemia in 5%, Gas-Cramps, Nausea/Vomiting 2%, Diarrhea, Leak, Dehydration, Regained Weight, Hernia, Minor Bleeding 1%, Renal Stones. Gall Bladder Removal, Minor Eating-Complaints, Malnutrition, Re-Exploration, Poor Wt Loss, Hair Loss, Low Ca., Pneumonia-Minor, Perforated Ulcer, Hypoglycemia, Thiamine Deficiency, Potassium Deficiency, Revision, Gout < 1%. Conclusion: The MGB leads to massive sustained weight loss in majority of patients. Complications after MGB occur in almost 1 in 3 patients, most are mild. Ulcers\Gastritis and anemia are the most common complications. Early complications are uncommon or mild and long term complications are usually preventable or treatable medically. Long term management includes yearly blood tests, vitamin and mineral supplementation, dietary guidance, avoidance of ulcerogenic agents and early aggressive medical intervention to treat ulcer/gastritis. Introduction: After adopting preoperative assessment of the perigastric vessels using 3D-CT and standardization of the procedures, obesity still influences smooth laparoscopy assisted gastrectomy (LAG). We evaluated the impact of body mass index (BMI) and area of intraperitoneal fat tissue on the risks of LAG. Patients and methods: The 51 patients who performed LAG for gastric cancer were included. The patients were divided two groups by BMI(< 25 BMI L group: n = 40, > 25 BMI H group: n = 11) and area of intraperitoneal fat tissue (< 100cm2 AF L group: n = 27, > 100cm2 AF H group:n = 24), respectively. Fat scan, which was computer software operating on abdominal CT, was used to measure the area of intraperitoneal fat tissue. The incidence of postoperative complications, operation time, intraoperative blood loss and number of dissected lymph nodes were compared between each two groups. Reslults: BMI; The Incidences of postoperative complications of BMI L and H group were 12.5%, 36.4%, respectively (p = 0.08). The mean blood loss were 85 g and 144 g, respectively (p = 0.08). There were no significant differences in operation time and the number of dissected LNs. Area of intraperitoneal fat tissue; The incidence postoperative complications (29.2%) and the mean blood loss (139 g) of AF H group were significantly higher than those of AF L group (8%, 62 g), respectively. The number of dissected LNs of AF H group (25) was significantly lower than that of AF L group (34). There was no significant difference in operation time. Conclusions: In AF H group, the incidence of postoperative complications and intraoperative blood loss were increased, the dissected number of LNs were decreased. The area of intraperitoneal fat tissue was useful to predict risks of LAG and postoperative complications with higher precision compared with BMI. surgery for cancer were subject to preoperative standard parenteral nutrition. Forty-eight patients were subsequently excluded and the remaining 159 subjects were randomly assigned in a 2 · 2 factorial design into 4 study groups, ie, standard enteral nutrition (SEN, n = 40), immunomodulating enteral nutrition (IMEN, n = 39), standard parenteral nutrition (SPN, n = 40), and immunomodulating parenteral nutrition (IMPN = 40). The study was designed to test the hypothesis that immunonutrition and enteral nutrition would reduce the incidence of infectious complications after upper gastrointestinal surgery; the secondary objective of the study was to evaluate the effect of nutritional intervention on overall morbidity and mortality rates, and hospital stay. Results: The overall morbidity rate was 33% and the incidence of individual complications was comparable between all groups. Infectious complications occurred in 17 of 80 patients given standard diets and in 21 of 79 patients receiving immunomodulatory formulas (odds ratio 0.770; 95% CI, 0.370-1.602). There were no significant differences between infectious complications in patients using enteral nutrition (20 of 79 patients) and parenteral formulas (18 of 80, odds ratio 1.134; 95% CI, 0.609-2.113). Neither immunostimulating formulas nor enteral feeding significantly affected secondary outcome measures, including overall morbidity and mortality rates, and hospital stay. Report of first case: A 52 year old man was referred for progressive dysphagia, involuntary 30 lb. weight loss, chronic cough and episodic upper chest pain of one year?s duration. He described food sticking at the lower cervical level. He had anterior cervical discectomy with plating six years previously. He was counseled for esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Report of second case: A 57 year old man underwent revisional anterior cervical plating. He had worsening neck pain and turbid drainage from a cervical drain on the first postoperative day. He became febrile to 101.8F. Barium swallow was negative. His surgeon requested consultation for EGD. Techniques: EGD in the first case demonstrated gross erosion of the cervical plate into the esophageal lumen. A PEG tube was placed and the patient kept NPO until surgery. The cervical plate and screws were removed. A complex esophageal injury was identified and repaired with Alloderm soft tissue matrix. The patient was kept NPO and fed via the PEG tube for four weeks. EGD was performed in the second patient and identified a small esophageal injury on the right, approximately 3 cm distal to the cricopharyngeus muscle. He was made NPO and central venous access established for TPN. Results: Repeat EGD in the first patient demonstrated healing of the injury over the Alloderm tissue matrix. The PEG tube was removed and an oral diet started. His symptoms resolved and he has returned to his premorbid weight. The second patient was kept on antibiotics and TPN for a week as his drainage decreased. He remained afebrile and the drain was removed 10 days after EGD. He remained well at 4 months of follow up. Discussion: EGD and related techniques are critical in the diagnosis, therapy and follow up of suspected and proven esophageal injuries of any etiology. These cases support the use of EGD in such clinical situations. The second case exemplifies the superior sensitivity of EGD versus radiologic methods for detection of anatomically small, yet clinically significant injuries. Chylothorax is a rare complication from a Lap Nissen Fundoplication for treatment of GERD. Two weeks post-op, the patient returned for follow up and was found to have a pleural effusion. Further evaluation, including thoracentesis revealed a chylothorax. The patient was given a trial of conservative management but ultimately required a thoracotomy for mass ligation of the thoracic duct and then lymphoscintigraphy with embolization of the chyle leakage. In the presentation of a chylothorax after a Lap Nissen Fundoplication, surgical drainage is required. Though conservative measures can be successful in the treatment of come chylothoracies, it may become necessary to perform a thoracotomy to surgically ligate the damaged lymphatic channels. Imaging and interventional radiology may be necessary to obtain cure in a patient with a persistent leakage of chyle even after a surgical intervention. It is important to recognize that, though rare, a Lap Nissen Fundoplication can be the cause of a significant injury to the lymphatic channels leading to the development of a chylothorax. Introduction: Critical to the evaluation of NOTES procedures is the perceived benefit of scarless surgery weighed against its unique complications such as gastric leak (GL), gastric hemorrhage (GH), pelvic cellulitis (PC), pelvic abscess (PA) and pelvic hemorrhage (PH). The goal of this study was to calculate health utility (HU) values for these complications, to provide a metric that reflects patients? willingness to accept the risks of NOTES cholecystectomy for its potential benefits. HU evaluations are not surveys but are tools based in utility theory that provide a quality of life measure that is comparable across disease states. HU are valued on a scale of 0 (state equivalent to death) to 1 (state of perfect health). For comparison, the published HU of patients with acute cholecystitis is 0.77. Methods: Patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis were prospectively enrolled in the study. Patients were administered standardized scenarios explaining the potential benefits of transvaginal (TVC) and transgastric (TGC)cholecystectomy along with the unique complications of these approaches and the management involved (GL, GH, PC, PA, PH). Rating scale (RS), standard gamble (SG), and time trade-off (TTO) methods were used to determine the value of HU for each of these complications. Results: Sixteen patients (81% women, 69% Caucasian) were evaluated with a mean age of 56 ± 2.8 years (mean ± standard error) and mean body mass index of 32 ± 1.5. HU values for all NOTES complications ranged from 0.71-0.89. Data are summarized in the table. Conclusion: With this study, initial HU values for complications after NOTES cholecystectomy have been established. In general, NOTES complications were similar in value to that of acute cholecystitis. When scenarios involved risk (SG, TTO), women tended to value complications of PC and PA worse. These results can be used to compare how patients value these unique complications with other known disease states and can be used to perform cost-effectiveness analyses to evaluate NOTES procedures. Unfortunately it is not without complications. The complication rates listed in the literature is low and only increase in the more complex cases or when a less experienced surgeon performs the procedure. Other than the bile duct injuries, the more common complications which are seen include bleeding and bile leakage. In the past, the routine use of drains in laparoscopic cholecystectomy was an accepted practice. However this was associated with increased hospital stay, pain and fever and many surgeons now prefer not to drain or drain only the difficult cases. In the abdomen, the beneficial effects of fibrin sealant have been reported in both experimental and clinical practice. We present our experience with the use of surgical glue in difficult laparoscopy cases. Methods and Procedures: During a 9 month period 134 patients presented with gallbladder disease which required laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A total of 47 cases had bleeding, adhesion formation and bile leakage during the procedure. Of these, 22 cases had a closed suction drain placed in gallbladder fossa and electrocautery was used in the bleeding sites. In addition to electrocautery, the remaining 25 patients had the application of a synthetic acrylic surgical glue [N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate] modified by addition of a monomer [methacryloxysulfolane] placed in the gallbladder fossa and bleeding sites without the use of drains. Postoperative complications including pain, fever, and length of hospitalization were recorded. The patients were all evaluated 2 weeks postoperatively with a follow-up questionnaire and exam. Results: Results: Of the 22 complicated cholecystectomy cases where drains were used, 3 patients had a low grade postoperative fever, and the average length of stay was 2.3 days. In the group that had the synthetic glue (25 patients), 1 patient had a low grade postoperative fever and the average length of stay was 1.6 days. A significant reduction of pain and earlier return to normal activity was noted in those patients treated with the synthetic glue. Conclusion:The use of N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate synthetic glue in the gallbladder fossa is associated with less post-operative pain and hospital stay and may be beneficial in the difficult laparoscopic cholecystectomy cases. Background: Dilation of tight or complete coloanal anastomotic strictures has a risk of potential false tract formation and anastomotic disruption. Use of endoscopic dilation is limited by alternated anatomy. Here, we report our experience of three cases of colonoscopic antegrade dilation for coloanal anastomotic stricture via loop ileostomy using pediatric colonoscope. CASES: Three patients underwent low anterior resection for locally advanced rectal cancer after the completion of chemoradiation with loop ileostomy. Case 1: 65 yo man was found to have anastomotic stricture prior to ileostomy takedown 9 mos later. The anastomotic opening was small and eccentric in position. Blind dilation was not attempted. Antegrade colonoscopy was performed via ileostomy. The anastomosis was identified without a visible lumen. With the aid of digital retrograde palpation, recanalization was achieved by cut current using the tipped snare followed by balloon dilation. Patient did well subsequently with retrograde dilations as needed and the ostomy was closed 2 mos later. Case 2: 78 yo had loop ileostomy reversal 7 months later. Several days after ileostomy closure, she developed abdominal distension. Her anastomosis was closed and retrograde dilation was not possible. Ileostomy was again created. Antegrade colonoscopy was attempted 2 months later. The anastomotic site was successfully identified with a pinhole opening. A balloon dilator was used over the guidewire and after dilation to 8 mm, retrograde dilation was performed. Ostomy takedown was successful 3 months later. Case 3: 80 yo man found to have complete closure of coloanal anastomosis 6 month after LAR. Antegrade colonoscopy was attempted via ileostomy. His colon contained abundant mucus complicating the advancement of the scope. Pediatric colonoscope did not reach the anastomosis and it was exchanged to an enteroscope. Despite the prolonged effort, anastomosis was not reached. The patient developed significant abdominal distension and later intraabdominal free air was confirmed. The patient underwent colonic decompression tube placement via ostomy under fluoroscopy. After decompression, the patient became asymptomatic. The patient recovered uneventfully without surgical intervention. CONCLUSIONS: Colonoscopic antegrade dilation of coloanal anastomotic stricture is a viable option for tight or complete anastomotic strictures with good clinical outcome avoiding surgical revision and it assists in transition to ostomy takedown. Complete closure of anastomosis has a risk of potential barotrauma with excessive distension of colon with air and adequate decompression is mandatory if recanalization fails. Objective: ?Inadvertent vagotomy? is often discussed from the podium of national meetings as a cause of complications of Nissen fundoplication. Sometimes the tone of the comments borders on inferring medico-legal liability in such cases. The goal of this review is to see if there is a valid correlation with vagotomy and the suggested complications. Methods: 300 sequential laparoscopic hiatus hernia repairs were reviewed to assess the incidence of disabling bloating, diarrhea, or dumping. 50 patients who had undergone truncal vagotomy without drainage in combination with laparoscopic adjustable gastric band placement were queried to determine the incidence of these complications. Results: Of the 300 laparoscopic antireflux/diaphragm repairs, only 2 required takedown or some revision for severe bloating and diarrhea. There was no correlation between the hernia complexity and type of repair and the subsequent symptoms. Of the 50 patients who had vagotomy alone, there have been no complaints of diarrhea, dumping, gastric outlet obstruction, or significant bloating. They have all experienced an ablation of their hunger and in preliminary review, they have lost more weight than their cohorts who had lap band alone. Conclusions: Results of this review of laparoscopic Nissen fundoplications/ hiatus hernia repairs and truncal vagotomy without drainage does not support the commonly ascribed complications of gastric outlet obstruction, diarrhea, or dumping. ?Inadvertent vagotomy? should not be blamed for complex complaints that sometimes occur following antireflux/hiatus hernia surgery. (1) and esophageal perforation (1). In the hindgut group they included cardiac arrest (9), leak (6), pulmonary embolus (3), stroke (2), hemorrhage (2), as well as various other rare causes (liver failure, ischemic gut, aspiration pneumonia). For end-organ, observed deaths were limited to the splenectomy group and included sepsis, pancreatitis, intra-cranial hemorrhage and cardiac arrest. Analysis revealed that age, perforation/leak, a past history of heart disease as well as post-operative cardiac and pulmonary complications all increased a patient?s chances of dying following laparoscopic abdominal surgery. For both foregut and hindgut categories, age and intestinal perforation or leak were the greatest predictors of death. A subgroup analysis in the end-organ category suggested that 30-day mortality was greatest in patients with hematologic malignancies and was independent of the surgical indication. Surgical experience was not a predictor. CONCLUSION While the total number of mortalities in this cohort is acceptably small, this study provides important insight into predictors of 30-day mortality. It allows for identification of higher risk individuals and also permits potential optimization of these factors. Objective: To establish the frequency and nature of complications related to the access-port in patients who underwent Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric banding (Allergan, Inc., Irvine, CA). Methods: We reviewed the medical records of 435 patients who underwent laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding in our institution to ascertain the complications related to the access-port. The complications data were collected both by hospital readmission and reoperations as well as prospective collection of data in surgeon?s office as COE (Centers of excellence) requirement. Results: from April 2005 to June 2008, the rate of complications related to the access-port occurred in 1.4%, corresponding to 6 cases. Those included: infection requiring removal of the port and subsequent re-placement in a different area: 3 cases (0.7%); infection which responded to medical treatment, 1 case (0.2%); port flip over, 1 case (0.2%) and leak around the port, 1 case (0.2%). Conclusion: In our experience, complications related to the access-port are not as frequent as compared with published studies, but in most of cases (83%) required surgical intervention. Efforts should always be made to achieve a sterile technique and appropriate anchoring to the fascial plane in order to prevent them efficiently. In August 2008 the American Board of Surgeons announced new requirements for general surgery residents seeking board certification that will be implemented beginning July 2009. All residents in the class of 2009-10 and later will have to complete the Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) certification in addition to the current necessary certifications in ACLS and ATLS. Prior to this announcement the Washington Hospital Center started a training program for general surgery residents to practice the hands on FLS skills in preparation for FLS certification. Thus the purpose of this study is to show the initial findings of FLS skill performance when the established FLS curriculum is complimented by a new program, the FLS Olympics. General surgery and OB GYN residents will participate in a prospective longitudinal study beginning at the start of their second year and culminating with certification at the end of the their third year. Residents will work at their own pace to reach a pre-established level of proficiency in each of the five tasks in the FLS curriculum. There will be proctored sessions to document performance in a log so individual improvement can be traced. At the end of each month a scoreboard will show the new leaders in each skill. The display will create an atmosphere of competition and give an incentive to each resident to outperform their colleagues. We plan to present initial findings that support the notion that the addition of competition will reduce time needed to achieve proficiency. Instead of the 80 tries to reach proficiency in the FLS curriculum, we predict that 85% of the residents will achieve proficiency with 25 attempts for each of the five tasks. The faster the competition is moving through the curriculum, the faster each resident will progress. Incorporating competition is an easy mechanism to ease the difficulty and duration of this training. Introduction: We hypothesized that the LAP Mentor virtual reality (VR) simulator can improve scores on a video test, which has previously been proven to accurately measure surgical skill, thus establishing concurrent validity. Furthermore, we suspected that a decline in performance would be noted following a three week to one month period without training. Methods and Procedures: We tested 20 medical students interested in becoming surgeons. Each student completed three tasks on a video trainer before training on the VR trainer. Students then completed the three tasks again immediately after completing the VR basic skills training program. Finally, after a 3-4 week absence of training, students completed the tasks for a third time. Completion time and number of errors on the video trainer tasks were compared using analysis of variance. Results: A total of 20 students were tested. For all three tasks, completion times significantly decreased after training and maintained this improvement after a three week absence of training. Times neither increased nor decreased significantly after an absence of training. Regarding number of errors, for two tasks, there was a significant decrease in errors immediately after training. For one of the two improved tasks, the number of errors continued to decrease significantly after an interruption in training, while for the other task, there was an increase in the number of errors after absence of training. However for the third task, no significant difference in numbers of errors was found, regardless of training. Overall, virtual training improved video trainer times significantly immediately after training, and they remained so three weeks later. Conclusions: The LAP Mentor basic skills module has concurrent validity. Completion of the LAP Mentor training protocol improved completion times and number of errors on the video trainer, which correlates with improved surgical skill. After an interruption of training for at least three weeks, completion times generally remained improved as compared to the initial scores, but did not significantly increase or decrease from the scores achieved immediately after training. Thus, LAP Mentor training provided a lasting improvement in skill. Less notable conclusions were made regarding number of errors. The effects of long term interruptions in training remain unclear. The Japan Society for Endoscopic Surgery (JSES) started Endoscopic Surgical Skill Qualification (ESSQS) in 2004, and carried out four examinations up to 2007. Assessment was performed by reviewing documents, laparoscopic surgery experiences, and qualifying unedited video tape by two independent referees. We adopted two criteria to evaluate surgical skills, as common and procedure-specific criteria to each gastrointestinal organ. Common criteria were given 60 points regarding basic endoscopic practice, and procedure-specific criteria were given 40 points to evaluate specialized skills of the practice. A score of 70 points is designated as the passing mark. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was evaluated by ten practice steps and degree of difficulty in completion. The proper skill evaluation was by the following items, elevating gall bladder (GB), retracting duodenum and transverse colon, exposing layer around cystic duct, identifying cystic artery and right hepatic artery, identifying common bile duct, transecting cystic duct, layer of dissecting from liver bed, bleeding control at liver bed and retrieval of GB. Each step was given three points respectively, and further points were added by referee, from neither for easy case to 10 points for difficult case according to the difficulty to complete. They must submit a list of patients on whom they have performed surgery (including complications) and an unedited video showing one of the relevant surgical procedures. The initial judging committee consisted of 25 experienced surgeons who were recommended by the JSES and mutually reviewed videos submitted by the other surgeons. They were divided into six groups (esophagus, stomach, colon, biliary tract, spleen, and endocrine/others). For assessment of the videos, the judging committee prepared ''common criteria'' (60 points) and ''procedure-specific criteria'' (40 points). Assessment of videos was done by two judges. If both judges assigned a score of 70 points or more, the applicant passed. If the two judges disagreed, a final decision was made by either obtaining the opinion of a third judge or by group assessment. Over four years, there have been 1,111 applicants and 518 (46.6%) have been successful. The main problem with this system has been relatively low inter-rater agreement (kappa value: 0.31-0.40) between the initial two judges. However, it seems to obtain valid results because the incidence of complications was significantly lower in patients treated by successful applicants (4.2?}0.3%) than in those treated by failed applicants (5.5?}0.4%)(p = 0.0295). To improve inter-rater agreement, consensus meetings of judges have been held, and the assessment criteria have been modified and made more detailed. Although the ESSQS still has some problems, this system should promote training and decrease complications. Introduction: Surgical simulation is becoming a more widely used method in the training of residents as it enables the honing of technical skills and exposes residents to new procedures resulting in the reduction of error in the operating room and increases in patient safety. The inequities and inconsistencies of the cognitive and technical skill levels of incoming resident interns are of increasing concern. We therefore implemented a one day boot camp in our surgical skills training lab to assess the cognitive and manual skills acquisition of our general surgery first year interns and to standardize their level of preparedness for surgery. Methods: The study cohort consisted of 12 surgery interns (n = 10 general surgery, n = 2 urology). Subjects were exposed to a didactic session consisting of related topics proctored by general surgery attendings and advanced residents. Subjects practiced PEG transfer, camera driving and knot tying skills. Subjects were administered written and manual skills pre and post tests with the same components. Descriptive statistics are displayed as median scores and range. Comparative statistical analyses were performed using the Wilcoxon match-pairs signed-rank test. Results: The didactic training was associated with a significant improvement in PEG transfer time, knot tying time and written test scores, and a trend toward improved camera time (Table) . Conclusion: A one-day didactic and practical course in the surgical skills training of interns improves manual proficiency and assures a basic fund of knowledge of residents. Introduction: We present a laparoscopic training program for the developing world that emphasizes safety and sustainability, which has been successfully implemented in two countries. This is to counter significant barriers to the adoption of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, including the local infrastructure, the high cost of laparoscopic equipment, lack of skilled preceptors, and concerns regarding the safety of these operations in inexperienced trainees. Methods: A laparoscopic cholecystectomy training program was developed by the surgical staff at Bassett Healthcare in Cooperstown, NY, and executed in the Dominican Republic and in Anguilla. The program was conceived and executed in three phases. Phase one included scouting potential locations to assess sustainability and to determine the commitment and ability of local surgeons. Phase two was carried out over five days and included a day of didactic sessions, practicing on a low cost laparoscopic trainer, and a series of preceptored cases. Phase three was a repeat trip 4-6 weeks after the initial training to trouble-shoot. Equipment was donated from the hospital as well as industry sponsors. Careful consideration was given to issues of sustainability, and disposables were kept at a minimum. Local surgeons completed proctored cases with the goal of having them operate independently. Patient data was collected to track outcomes. Results: Thirty-one laparoscopic cholecystectomies were performed under the auspices of this program. Twelve were completed independently by the local surgeons since the implementation of the program. Of these 12, the median length of stay was 8 hours. There were no conversions to open, bile duct injuries, or deaths in this series. Both programs are still in operation 18 and 9 months after our last visit. Conclusion: With a well designed program emphasizing safety and sustainability, a cost-effective laparoscopic cholecystectomy training program can be conducted in developing countries, with safe and long-lasting impact to the local community. Introduction: There is a paucity of knowledge on the application and usage of common surgical stapling devices by general surgery residents. Our study aimed to elicit the deficiencies that exist in this particular area and assess a short term teaching strategy to determine if a didactic review of stapling devices would improve knowledge and skill in the application of these surgical devices. Methods. A 20 question multiple choice questionnaire was designed to assess three realms of questions regarding surgical staplers: circular, linear and laparoscopic. The questionnaire was administered to all available Clinical General Surgery residents at Baylor College of Medicine Residency program at a weekly academic teaching session. The residents were not aware of the reason for the meeting and were not allowed to pre-research or prepare for the questionnaire. The residents were assigned random numbers and were allotted 20 minutes to complete the questionnaire and the questionnaire was collected by a blinded data analyst and placed into envelope #1. Thereafter a 40 minute didactic session on surgical staplers was given by an attending general surgeon at the Baylor College of Medicine and one industry representative. Upon completion of the session the same questionnaire was re-taken by all attending surgical residents and 20 minutes was allotted for completion of this questionnaire. All questionnaires were collected by a blinded analyst and placed into envelope #2. Analysis was completed by the data analyst who was blinded to the timing of the test and the identity of surgical residents. Results: Twenty six of thirty nine General Surgery Residents (67%) attended. Pre-test average score was 53% (Mean = 10.6; Median = 10) and post-test average score was 77% (Mean = 15.4; Median = 16). A paired samples t-test was computed and a statistically significant difference (Mean Difference = ) 4.77) was found between test scores from pretest and posttest, p < .001. An independent t-test was performed to compare mean scores of R1-R2 (n = 10) with R3-5 residents. A statistically significant difference was found between the two groups in the pre-test (p = 0.046), but there was no statistically significant difference between the two groups at post-test assessment (p = 0.12 Introduction: Laparoscopic skills training outside the operating room is becoming the standard for educating surgical residents. There are various methods of training outside the operation theatre ranging from inanimate models, virtual simulation and training on cadavers. The best method of training has not yet been well established. This study prospectively evaluates the laparoscopic skills acquisition in a short term, intensive, focused training in a phantom model using porcine gall bladder. Materials and Methods: 62 surgeons with no prior experience of performing laparoscopic cholecystectomy undergoing training in the Minimally Invasive Surgery Training Centre at our Institute were enrolled for the study. Participants during the training course perform 10 laparoscopic cholecystectomies in a porcine gall bladder integrated in a specially designed MIC Tuebingen trainer. The trainer is designed in the human anatomical form of an insufflated abdomen and the equipment and hand instruments are same as that used in the human beings. The laparoscopic skills acquisition was evaluated in terms of operation time, cystic duct dissection, and cystic artery dissection, plane of dissection (liver injury) and gall bladder perforation. These parameters were objectively assessed on a scale of 1-5. Technical laparoscopic skills acquisition was assessed by modified Global Operative Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) system based on depth perception, bimanual dexterity, tissue handling, efficiency and autonomy. Data are expressed as mean +/) SD; statistical analysis was performed by repeated measure ANOVA. p value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Results: Mean time taken for the first case was 49 minutes which reduced to 31.5 minutes in the tenth case (p value < 0.001). Mean scores in identification and dissection of cystic duct improves from 1.7 in the first case to 4.1 in the tenth case and for cystic artery it improves from 1.9 to 3.5 (p value < 0.005). The gall bladder perforation rate does not show a statistically significant improvement. 78% of trainee works in wrong surgical planes in their first case making liver injury while 75% of trainees find out the proper plane of dissection in tenth case. Improvement in mean score in depth perception (1.9 to 4.8), bimanual dexterity ( , and a porcine jejuno-jejunostomy model. After the workshop, residents were asked to complete a questionnaire relating to their experience with laparoscopic surgery and their opinions regarding the 4 training models. Descriptive statistics were utilized for data analysis. Results: Fourteen (9 male) of the 16 residents enrolled in the workshop completed the questionnaire. The majority of the residents had observed and performed over 40 laparoscopic cases. On average, residents act as primary surgeons on laparoscopic cases 2-5 times per month, as first assistant 1-5 times, and as observers 1-5 times. The participants had performed over 10 laparoscopic cholecystectomies and appendectomies, > 8 laparoscopic colorectal procedures and no laparoscopic foregut surgery. Half of the residents felt that their exposure to advanced laparoscopy was insufficient. The vast majority of residents felt that they had not received adequate instruction in laparoscopic suturing (median 1 on a 5 point Likert scale), and did not feel proficient with this technique. At the end of the workshop, residents ranked the animal model as their preferred training tool for laparoscopic suturing, followed by the FLS black box, with the VR Simulator Task being the least preferred tool. When asked to rank each task individually however, the majority of residents ranked each task as being ?moderately helpful? or better (5-7 on a 7 point Likert scale). Conclusions: Training in advanced laparoscopic skills is still suboptimal and needs to be incorporated early in the residency curriculum. Future developments in VR simulation are necessary to provide a realistic experience with intracorporeal suturing. Background and aim) Laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy (LADG) has been widely accepted because of its minimum invasiveness. However, it is difficult to develop the techniques of LADG. Recently, skill qualification system of the Japan Society for Endscopic Surgery is established, and prevalence and progress of techniques is preceded. The aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of an endoscopic surgical skill qualification holder on the learning curve. Patients and Methods) 15 patients who underwent LADG with lymph node dissection from the beginning to 2008 were divide into two groups; Group A (n = 10) were operated by the skill qualification holder and Group B (n = 5) by a resident under instruction of the skill qualification holder. Operating process was standarized and divided into several parts. In LADG of our institute, 1) division of gastrocolic ligament, 2) division of right gastroepiploic artery and vein(RGEA and RGEV), 3) transection of duodenum, 4) division of right gastric artery(RGA), 5) dissection of lymph nodes around common hepatic artery(CHA) and celiac axis, 6) division of left gastric vein and artery(LGV and LGA), 7) dissection of lymph nodes along lesser curvature, 8) 5 cm midline incision and 9) Roux-en Y reconstruction. In this pilot study we demonstrated that residents with home access to this particular video game statistically improved right hand path performance (efficiency?), and that they tended to practice more than those with access only at ?work?. Our inability to demonstrate that residents with access to a modified video game at home, ?homework?, performed better than residents that were able to practice at work only was likely due to a small sample size and possibly due to poor translation of this particular video game to the skills being tested. Introduction: Equipment of operating theater is very important, especially in endoscopic surgery. It is well known that location of image display was influencing perceptual processing and endoscopic manipulation. The aim of this study is to evaluate whether difficulties of task performances in endoscopic surgery will be changed or not by scope position. Methods and Procedures: The expert surgeon (who has experiences more than 300 laparoscopic colorectal surgeries) of endoscopic surgery participated in this study. Hiroshima University Endoscopic Surgical Assessment Device (HUESAD) which analyzes the directiondependent dexterity for an objective assessment was used on this examine. We previously reported that HUESAD was able to track the movements of the tip of endoscopic instrument precisely while participants were doing some tasks on the experimental table. The distance from fulcrum to the tip of endoscopic instrument by optical sensor and micro encoder, and time taken were recorded. This system shows the orbits of the tip of the instrument. The task 1 to place the tip of the endoscopic instrument on the top of these poles from the proximal to distal side pole, and then returned from distal to proximal. And this task was performed under two scope positions which were set up at 0°and 90°of misalignment to the participant?s left side. The task 2 was to place the tip of the endoscopic instrument on the top of these poles from the proximal to distal side pole, and then returned from distal to proximal, and from the left to right side pole, and then returned from right to left under one condition that scope was fixed at 90°of misalignment to the participant?s left side Results: Analyzed data of the task 1 showed that the 0°position required significantly shorter execution time and significantly smaller deviation than those of the 90°misalignment position (p < 0.0011) (p < 0.0001). The data of the task 2 showed that the execution time and deviation of the movement from the left to right side pole, and then returned from right to left were significantly smaller than those of from the proximal to distal side pole, and then returned from distal to proximal (p < 0.0106) (p < 0.0001). Conclusion: Our data confirmed that task performance is changed by the scope position. This result revealed that we are able to do safety endoscopic surgery by changing scope position for every situation during operation. Giselle G Hamad MD, Julio A Clavijo-Alvarez MD, Sung W Cho MD, University of Pittsburgh Introduction: Modeling is a cognitive process during which the trainee encodes information about a skill during observation. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of modeling on laparoscopic skill performance. Methods: Twenty-four medical students with no prior laparoscopic experience participated in the study. Participants viewed an instructional video of a laparoscopic skill mimicking running the bowel (?rope task?). They were videorecorded performing this skill and were randomly assigned to observe their own video (?self?) versus observing a video of an expert (?expert?) performing the task. They were videorecorded repeating the task. The videos were scored by two blinded reviewers using a task-specific checklist and global rating scores. The time to complete the task and enumeration of errors were also recorded. Data were analyzed using repeated measures of ANOVA. Results: There were no significant differences between the self and expert groups in the taskspecific checklist scores, time for task completion, or errors. Among the global ratings scores, there were no significant differences in instrument handling, accuracy, bimanual dexterity, or economy of motion between groups. The group that viewed the expert video had a greater improvement in rope handling compared to the group that viewed themselves (p = 0.02). Conclusions: Observing a video of a skilled expert is more effective than observing one?s own performance in improving laparoscopic object handling. In particular, the handle requires the use of a toggle which is unique in this instrument. We have developed a virtual reality trainer for the device that offers the use of the actual instrument handle while creating a visible virtual instrument tip complete with virtual needle and suture on a monitor. This report represents the initial validation experiments for the device. Description: A virtual reality and haptic enhanced interface using the Endostitch? device has been developed. The necessary software and hardware modifications were wholly developed or constructed in our laboratory. Residents with clinical experience with the instrument (4 senior residents) and those na?¨ve to the instrument (3 junior residents) were tested in an effort to validate the ability of the instrument to discriminate between these groups. Residents were timed while creating a slip-knot using software based metrics tracking. The order sequence of knots and level of resident were codified. Comparisons were made using two-tailed Stu-dent?s t-test and statistical relevance identified at p < 0.05. Preliminary Results: Senior residents were able to complete slip-knots using the trainer much faster than junior residents (20 +/)8.2 sec vs. 59.5 +/)32.1 sec, p < 0.001; graphic). With repetitions we saw improvement in time-to-completion for junior residents such that the last 10 knots tied by juniors averaged 31.2 +/)10.0 sec, much closer to the initial results for the seniors and significantly improved from their initial knots (p < 0.001). Conclusions: We believe that this simulation is internally valid demonstrating the ability to discriminate between na?¨ve and experienced users. Early data also suggests that practice with the module enhances task completion. Future development will include: 1) a virtual tutor for the device, 2) taking those residents that have been trained with the virtual trainer to the boxtrainer for demonstration of translation of the skill into a customary testing apparatus, 3) defining and tracking secondary objective measures of performance such as efficiency of motion and error rate. BACKGROUND: Endoscopic surgery has developed dramatically during the past decade because of its several advantages. Endoscopic surgery requires new unique skills that differ from those in open surgery, and therefore, a professional education / training is very important. However, since there is not necessarily an excellent instructor anywhere, the difference of surgical skill level between areas or countries occurs. The tele-mentoring that an instructor indicates in real time from a distant place or the foreign country may solve such problems. METHODS: Two human soft adult cadavers, which rendered the muscles, soft tissues, and neurovascular structures soft and pliable, resembling fresh tissues, were prepared in the operation room of the surgical training center, Chulalongkorn University, Thailand. A high speed Internet, JGN2 (Japan Gigabit Network 2) was used as an information transmission channel in this tele-mentoring between Thailand and Japan supported by NTT Communications. We selected laparoscopic gastrectomy as a training subject, because this operation was flourishingly performed in Japan, but was not almost performed in Thailand at that time. The Japanese expert surgeon who was familiar with the laparoscopic gastrectomy instructed the procedures of the operation, and gave advices about the surgical anatomy, the method of making a proper surgical view with assistants, the direction of dissection, the point of resection, etc. RESULTS: The surgical anatomy, the tissue consistency and anatomical plane were well preserved, and all procedures were completely performed in both tables. All Thai surgeons were satisfied with understanding the detail procedures of the operation or usage of the instruments, by the tele-mentoring from Japan. The quality of the operative view sent from Thailand was enough feasible to recognize the anatomy or operative procedures. The time delay was about 0.6 seconds, but the delay did not produce any problem in exchange of each information during the operation. The department of surgery in Chulalongkorn University clinically introduced the laparoscopic gastrectomy for gastric cancer after this tele-mentoring mission, and they performed the operations in six patients in 6 months with satisfactory results. CONCLUSION: In the present trial, the results indicated that the tele-mentoring in the long distance (3750 km) using the soft cadavers was satisfactory to both countries. We proposed that such training system could contribute to improvement in the level of surgical skills in endoscopic surgery internationally. Introduction: Venous air embolism (VAE) is a rare but potentially devastating complication of laparoscopic surgery. The patient outcomes from VAE are poor with a reported 50% mortality and the event represents a significant risk of malpractice risk exposure for hospitals and physicians. The infrequent occurrence and severity of this event make it a perfect target for team based simulation training. At our institution, we sought to improve patient safety through conducting an interdisciplinary training scenario (ITS) directed at VAE. Our goal was to create an ITS that successfully recreated the setting of a VAE and to compare the insti-tution?s cost of developing and performing an ITS to the average indemnity award of VAE. Methods: A focus group consisting of a faculty minimally invasive surgeon, faculty anesthesiologist, surgical resident, simulation coordinator, two nurse educators, and personnel from risk management and patient safety designed and conducted four VAE ITS. All OR training scenarios were performed in a simulated operating room with a team of OR nurses (one circulator, one surgical technician), anesthesiology and surgical residents, and a ''high fidelity'' mannequin. The scenario was designed after performing a through needs assessment and reviewing accounts of VAE from indemnity awards. Over 30,000 attorney-submitted indemnity award summaries published in the monthly journal Medical Malpractice from 1989-2006 were reviewed for evidence of VAE. Average award costs were then compared to the costs of ITS development and performance at our institution. Results: 23 cases of venous air embolism were identified in 1,222 indemnity awards. 6/23 cases involved laparoscopic surgery by gynecologists or general surgeons. The remaining cases involved open or percutaneous procedures. The mean indemnity award for a venous air embolism was $2.6 million (range $119,900-$24,700,000). In contrast, the total cost to design and perform the ITS at our institution was $2,994 ($1,436 design, $1,558 performance). ITS performance costs were averaged after 4 VAE scenario performances. Our results demonstrate that for the mean cost of one VAE indemnity award, an institution could design and perform 1,667 training sessions allowing healthcare providers to practice preventing, diagnosing and managing a VAE. Conclusions: Venous air embolisms are preventable, and can lead to sizeable indemnity awards. In contrast, development and performance of an interdisciplinary surgical simulation scenario is relatively inexpensive and can lead to the avoidance of VAE as well as identification of the event and subsequent management protocols. Our analysis demonstrates that VAE occur in many other settings than laparoscopic surgery and that the average design and performance costs of an ITS was less than 0.1% of the average VAE indemnity award. These findings argue that prevention with education and training could be a cost effective and potentially life-saving intervention for surgeons and operating room teams performing laparoscopic surgery. Objective: Previous studies using simulation technology have largely focused on technical skills. The objective of this study was to assess the usefulness of a newly developed laparoscopic ventral hernia (LVH) simulator to assess intra-operative decision making. Methods: Participants included fourth year surgical residents attending a two day laparoscopic hernia course. The materials included a newly developed LVH simulator, background and post-use surveys. The simulator had a reconfigurable 10 · 10 cm hernia defect. On day one, the defect was located in the midline 5 cm above the umbilicus. On day two, the defect was located in the right upper quadrant. Results: Background surveys revealed residents (N = 24) had performed, on average, 8.5 previous LVH repairs as primary surgeon. On a 5-point scale (1 = not difficult & 5 = extremely difficult) the residents rated the day one simulator as ?difficult? (2.61/5.0) and the usefulness as ?very useful? (3.61/5). On day 1, prior to formal, course training, only 12.5% of residents were able to successfully repair the hernia defect. On day two after a didactic session and animal lab, 100% of the residents were able to repair the defect. The day two simulator was rated as ?somewhat difficult? (1.88/5) and ?useful? (3.38/5). The decisions residents made that contributed to their success on day two include: 1) Port placement, 2) willingness to repurpose a port, 3) willingness to place additional ports, 4) use of mesh anchoring stitches, and 4) having a systematic approach to tacking the mesh. Conclusions: The newly developed LVH simulator can be used to assess residents? decision making skills. Our results indicate that didactic sessions and animal labs in a two day SAGES course appear to improve resident decision making. Our findings warrant further investigation of this simulator as a training and assessment tool. Objective: General surgery trainees perceptions regarding their own laparoscopic training remains poorly defined. The objective of this survey was to identify and evaluate learner experiences with laparoscopic procedures in general surgical programs on a national level. Methods: 284 residents were identified and contacted at English speaking general surgery programs across Canada. Each was asked to complete a web or paper based survey regarding their demographics, experiences with basic and advanced MIS procedures, and perceived barriers to training. Results: 239 of 284 (84%) surveyed residents responded. 87% of residents had access to a skills lab that taught MIS techniques, however standardized MIS curricula were implemented only 53% of the time. 80% of residents felt skills lab training translated to improved performance in the OR. Although 90% of residents felt they would be comfortable performing basic laparoscopic procedures, only 8% stated they would be comfortable performing advanced procedures at the end of their training. While 90% of general surgery residents felt that it was the academic surgical departments responsibility to teach advanced procedures, only 35% felt their surgical program was meeting this requirement. 50% of residents felt they had limited opportunity to be primary surgeon because an MIS fellow was present. Conclusion: There exists a wide disparity between the expectations of residents and their actual experience. The majority of residents are concerned that they will not acquire sufficient laparoscopic skills during their training to perform advanced cases in practice. Additionally, the role between resident and fellow level cases needs to be more clearly defined as the majority of respondents identified the presence of a MIS fellow as a negative learning influence. Finally, although most centers had a surgical skills lab, the perception of most respondents that standardized curricula are not available should be addressed. Introduction: The objective of this study is to determine whether skills acquired by simulation-based learning are enhanced with multi-modal curriculum including visual, auditory and kinesthetic and tactile techniques. Methods: A survey was administered to 27 general surgery residents at our program, levels PGY2 through PGY8, to determine their perceived skill, expertise and comfort level with advanced laparoscopic skills. The residents were then tested on an objective set of intracorporeal knot tying skills using box trainers. Following the completion, the residents were debriefed in a structured curriculum setting including booklet of instructions, a live demonstration by laparoscopically trained faculty and a video demonstration. The residents were then retested on the same skill set. Time to completion of the task and post-test survey were completed. Results: Of the 27 residents studied, only 3 were able to successfully complete the intracorporeal knot tying skills prior to a formal debriefing session. Pre-test surveys revealed that these residents were not confident in their laparoscopic skills and believed that previous laparoscopic training models were inadequate. Following the formal debriefment at least 50% of each resident level class was able to successfully complete the task and all residents surveyed reported improved confidence in their laparoscopic skills set. Conclusions: Novel laparoscopic educational models such as this one may serve as a useful addition to resident education in surgery residency programs, particularly in addressing improvement in resident skills and confidence prior to performing similar skills in an operative environment. Reliability of this multimodal model may be enhanced by addressing significant variability and training practices that exist in other training labs. Approaching laparoscopic training through a multi-modal approach addresses the variability in learning needs amongst a diversified group of residents. Introduction: The Fundamentals of Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS) program was designed to teach the physiology, fundamental knowledge, and technical skills required in basic laparoscopic surgery. Under the auspices of SAGES and industry support the program was recently made available to all US general surgery training programs. Nevertheless, the implementation cost of the program is unknown. The objective of this study was to evaluate the cost associated with the implementation of the FLS program into the curriculum of a busy general surgery residency. Methods: All general surgery residents (n = 15) followed a proficiency-based laparoscopic skills curriculum based on the FLS program during the academic year. All residents watched the FLS CD-Rom and trained to proficiency on the 5 FLS tasks (Peg transfer, Pattern cut, Ligating loop, Intracorporeal and Extracorporeal knot tying). Training occurred in one-hour weekly supervised sessions and resident attendance and performance were recorded. The cost associated with the implementation of the FLS program was assessed based on supplies, equipment, and personnel involvement needed. To decrease cost, task 3 (ligating loop) was modified to allow multiple uses of each endoloop. Results: Resident skills lab attendance averaged 51% (range 16-84%) for a total of 211 hours. Fifty three percent (8/15) of residents achieved proficiency in at least 3 of the tasks (peg transfer, pattern cut, & ligating loop) after a total of 577 repetitions during the study period. The overall cost associated with the FLS program was $11,626. Personnel cost was $3,338, equipment cost was $4,967 and supplies cost was $1,750 with the majority needed for suture ($1,242) and endoloops ($329). With the modification of task 3, each endoloop was used on average 9 times leading to $2,577 cost savings. Conclusion: This is the first study to describe the cost associated with the implementation of the FLS program in a general surgery residency. It further demonstrates cost savings by the modification of the ligating loop task to allow for multiple uses of each endoloop without compromising task quality. This information may be useful to programs trying to implement FLS into their curricula. Methods and Procedures: This is a prospective, randomized, blinded, controlled trial that enrolled twelve surgical interns to scheduled training with a VR simulator (n = 6) or to a control group of BT (n = 6). All study participants underwent a baseline testing of their laparoscopic skills at the zero time point in a live porcine model for five separate laparoscopic skills. The two groups were assigned to a similar number of mandatory training repetitions with their respective training modality (BT vs. VR simulator). They subsequently underwent assessment at two further time periods in a live porcine model at 2 months and 6 months to assess skill development. Each intern was asked to demonstrate proper use of a 30°camera, needle transfer, object tracking, vessel clipping and cutting, and finally intra-corporeal suture tying. Two blinded reviewers independently scored the intern?s performance at each of the specified time intervals. Results: The average composite scores for the five skills at the end of six months showed a significant increase in both the VR (4.72 to 6.98; p = 0.04) and BT(4.72 to 6.55; p = 0.02) trained residents. The difference in average composite scores achieved in the computer simulator group versus the laparoscopic box trainer group was not significant at the 6 month time period ( surveys were administered and 47(59%) responses were received from 41 male and 6 female surgeons. 93% surgeons were in private practice. 58% reported a change in practice after our courses. Of these, 25% surgeons had limited residency laparoscopy exposure of less than 50 cases. The total number of colon procedures for all participants increased six fold and there was an increase in the number of laparoscopic hernia procedures in surgeons who took colon courses. The increase in procedures was statistically significant in surgeons with laparoscopic residency experience of more than 50 cases compared to those with minimal exposure of less than 50 cases. This increase was not found between surgeons with residency experience of 50-200 cases compared to those with more than 200 cases. Future interest in advanced laparoscopy courses was noted in 65% surgeons and was more pronounced in surgeons with more than 50 cases in residency. Conclusions: Advanced laparoscopy courses significantly increase the number of course specific procedures but also increase other laparoscopic surgeries. Laparoscopy experience of more than 50 cases during residency is a strong predictor of increase in number of cases after attending courses. Results: For face validity, the quality of images were rated high (mean of 4.0), followed by realism of equipment (mean of 3.67). Quality of force feedback rating was at 2.64 and trust in the simulator at 2.83. Mann-Whitney U test between the 2 groups showed no significant difference of opinion between the expert and novice groups (p > 0.51). Construct validity scores from peg transfer and loop ligature tasks showed that VBLaST differentiated the 2 groups (p = 0.028). FLS did not differentiate between the 2 groups with just 2 tasks (p > 0.2) but did when pattern cutting was included (p = 0.004). VBLaST peg transfer alone was able to differentiate between the 2 groups (p = 0.027). Conclusions: Face validity scores demonstrated excellent image quality and overall realism. Higher fidelity is needed in force feedback quality to make this simulator acceptable as a scoring device. Construct validity results demonstrated that this VBLaST prototype is capable of differentiating between novices and experts but not at the fine resolution of FLS. Differences may be due to experts adapting more successfully to the VBLaST system. This is a significant first step towards a virtual reality FLS system. Background: Morbid obesity is a growing problem in the United States. As a result, now more than 100,000 laparoscopic roux-en-y gastric bypasses (LRYGB) are performed annually. A large portion of these are performed at teaching institutions. This procedure carries with it known complications, the most feared, is a leak at the gastro-jejunostomy. Intraoperative endoscopy (IE) has been shown to increase detection of this problem so it can be corrected at the time of surgery. Concomitant with this rise in bariatric procedures is an increased endoscopic requirement for surgical residents. The American Board of Surgery requires surgical residents to become familiar with flexible endoscopic techniques, but how they are to gain this experience is not formally outlined for program directors. Recently the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) has increased the amount of both laparoscopic and endoscopic procedures required during residency. Although the increase in numbers required for laparoscopic procedures seem attainable, the same cannot be said for flexible endoscopy. On average, residents are performing 26 upper endoscopies during surgical residency and now will be required to have 35 upper endoscopies. The requirement for colonoscopies has also been raised to 50 where the average is around 36 for most surgical programs. Currently most surgeons yield endoscopies to the gastroenterologists, which makes an increased volume for the residents a problem. We have recently instituted IE in our bariatric program. This has been beneficial in detecting gastrojejunostomy leaks and has at the same time has provided a means to improve the endoscopic experience for our surgical residents. Methods: Starting on September 25th 2007, our bariatric program initiated IE for our LRYBG patients. At the same time, resident participation was encouraged. A 12 month retrospective review of our database was performed. Results: Of our 100 patients who received LRYGB, 6 intraoperative leaks were discovered. These were corrected intraoperatively, with no post-op complications. The average length of stay was 2.33 days. Of the first 100 patients who had undergone LRYBG, residents performed the IE in 83 of those cases. Conclusion: IE for LRYGB has been shown to improve patient outcomes. In doing so, it has also provided needed endoscopic experience for our surgical residents. The shift in requirements for laparoscopic cases is a reflection on what is already being taught at most institutions. Endoscopy, however, will likely require a significant change at many programs to meet these requirements. Based on this, we recommend that IE be performed during LRYGB. IE is not only a means to detect leaks, but also improves the endoscopic skills and experience vital to the training of young surgeons. Methods: The FLS technical skills test was administrated and graded by a live observer (a FLS certified (proctor). Two camera feeds were simultaneously transmitted via teleconference software through the Internet. One feed was directly to the FLS box and the other feed was a standard webcam set up to view the test taker. An away observer (a laparoscopic surgeon with vast experience in teaching FLS) viewed the feeds from a site away from the test center. Both live and away observer recorded times via the live feeds. The endoloop and the two tied sutures were measured by the live grader. Both the circle and the gauze (for the pattern cut exercise) were photocopied before the live observer graded the task. The photocopies and the sutured materials (after being numbered) were placed into a bag to be sent to the away observer. Results: Ten sample tests (50 sections) were administered included in this study. During one of the sections, there was an issue with the Internet connection which was not included in the study. The overall correlation was extremely high for overall score (r = 0.997; p < 0.0001) and time (r = 0.9996; p < 0.0001). More importantly, the overall score and time never differed more than 1 and 3 respectively between live and away observers. Penalties were measured similar by both observers as well. Purpose: Psychomotor skill is absolutely necessary for endoscopic surgeons. We devised tasks and parameters to evaluate psychomotor skills during endoscopic surgery and investigated their validity. Methods: Sixteen novice medical students (N) and ten expert surgeons (E) whohad performed over 50 endoscopic surgeries participated in the study. We evaluated psychomotor skill by asking the participants to move forceps in a straight-line space. Three-dimensional position measurements of the forcep tips were analyzed with an electromagnetic tracking system (AURORA; Northern Digital Inc. CANADA). The following parameters were evaluated: efficiency of spatial distance, summation of spatial deviation, integration of deviation, motatsuki time, and motatsuki distance. Motatsuki means hesitation in achieving the desired goal point. Data are expressed as mean ± SD. A two-way repeated measure ANOVA and the Bonferroni method for multiple comparisons were used to identify differences at a significance level of p < 0.05. Results: There was no difference in the efficiency of spatial distance with the dominant ( Objective: To determine that remote robotic telepresence can be used to evaluate and train surgical residents and medical students in the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery (FLS). This project is a precursor to providing real time intraoperative video tele-consultation to surgeons deployed in remote areas in support of the Global War on Terorism. Methods: A control group of 15 and a robotic telepresence study group of 6 surgical residents and medical students underwent training and evaluation in FLS. FLS is an essential set of various tasks (peg transfer, circle pattern cut, endoloop placement, extracorporeal suture, and intracorporeal suture placement) with well studied proficiency time guidelines and noted relevance for laparoscopic surgical skill set development. Subjects viewed a live demonstration by a board-certified general surgeon of the 5 FLS tasks either in person or via robotic telepresence using the Remote Presence 7 (RP7) robot by In Touch Health. Instruction and data acquisition of the time to complete FLS tasks were recorded by the supervising surgeon. Subjects with prior FLS experience were eliminated from analysis. Standard statistical evaluation was performed to determine any differences between groups. A post-study satisfaction questionnaire was provided at the conclusion of the training to student, residents, and supervising surgeons. Results: The FLS peg transfer data revealed the following mean times (seconds) for the control group at repetition 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively: 107 +/)28, 100 +/)29, 88 +/)21, and 79 +/ )24. FLS peg mean transfer times (seconds) for the RP7 group at repetition 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively were 98 +/)7, 91 +/)18, 54 +/)21, and 55 +/)11. Repeated measures analysis of variance was performed and revealed no statistical difference between control and RP7 groups (p > 0.05). Next, FLS intracorporeal suture data revealed the following for mean times (seconds) at the denoted repetition for the control group at repetition 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively: 190 +/)70, 163 +/)67, 104 +/)28, and 78 +/)11. The FLS intracorporeal suture data revealed the mean times (seconds) for the RP7 group at repetition 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively: 161 +/130, 142 +/)38, 124 +/)29, and 113 +/)17. Again, no statistical difference (p > 0.05) existed between the control and the RP7 groups by repeated measures analysis of variance. Finally, a satisfaction survey was provided to medical students, residents, and supervising surgeons. All of the 6 of 6 residents and students surveyed reported ?strong agreement? that RP7 was an effective and interactive instruction method. The 2 of 2 supervising surgeon surveyed reported ?strong agreement? that RP7 was an effective means to supervise and train students and residents and saved time in travel to and from the training site. Conclusion: Remote robotic telepresence appears to be equivalent to in-person supervision, training, and evaluation with regards to the fundamentals of laparoscopic surgery training. Students and residents expressed more than satisfactory learning with both types of training. The supervising examiners noted a restriction on data acquisition with the remote robotic telepresence because only one subject could be evaluated at a time. In short, remote robotic telepresence offers an efficacious method for supervision of surgical based procedures. Objectives: Virtual simulators have been validated as training tools for development of laparoscopic skills and as an instrument of discrimination between novice and senior surgeons. Whilst formal training programs for inexperienced surgeons are lacking; there is no information about the use of these simulation devices in order to obtain optimal results. Material and methods: We present a quasi-experimental multi-variate study using the Lap SIM? laparoscopic surgery virtual simulator (Surgical Science?) with the Lap SIM Basic Skills 3.0 software (11 tasks) . Results from the performed exercises by 20 subjects (undergraduate students and first and second year residents) without previous exposition to laparoscopic surgery techniques (10 repetitions of each task, one hour per day, 10 hours of total exposure) were analyzed. Results: 11 tasks with progressive difficulty were analyzed using the following variables ?global score?, ?total time?, ?mistakes? and ?tissue damage?. The first seven tasks required only 5 repetitions in order to achieve a significantly improved score from the baseline (p < 0.05). The last 3 tasks required 9 or 10 repetitions in order to achieve the same skill improvement (p < 0.05). The most sensitive variables for detecting skill acquisition were ?total score? followed by ?total time?(p < 0.05). Conclusion: Laparoscopic surgical skills are significantly improved after training with the Lap SIM virtual simulator. An efficient training program should include 4-5 repetitions of the first 7 tasks; with 9-10 repetitions of tasks 7 thru 11 due to their complexity. ?Total time? and ?global score? seem to be the most important variables helpful in the skill acquisition progress. This curriculum would seem optimal for novice surgeons searching to acquire basic laparoscopic surgery skills. Introduction: Laparoscopic skills training outside the operating room is becoming the standard for educating surgical residents. Because of the specific procedure, and the difference from open surgery, it is imperative to establish unique training system to promote efficiency of learning laparoscopic skills. Recently in Japan, Japanese Society for Endoscopic Surgery (JSES) authorized technical experts who were certificated their laparoscopic skills. The aim of this study was to evaluate the efficiency of learning laparoscopic skills with or without authorized experts of JSES during ''Hands on training'' and ''Step by step training'' Methods: Among patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery for colo-rectal cancer from May 2004 to July 2008 at the Tokushima Univ., 30 patients during early period and 10 patients during late period of induction of laparoscopic surgery, 12 patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery by resident under the guidance of authorized technical experts of JSES, and 30 patients who underwent laparoscopic surgery by authorized technical experts of JSES were investigated. Preoperative simulation using virtual images with MD-CT, PET-CT and diffusion-weighted MRI (DW-MRI) were performed everytime to ensure the anatomy. Each procedure was then broken down into its key components (exposure internal approach, outer approach, isolation of the vascular pedicle, dissection of the lymph nodes, and anastomosis), operation time, amount of blood loss, intra-and post-operative complications, and conversion to open surgery were investigated. There was no significant difference between resident and expert in duration of each part of procedure, whereas there was significant prolongation in early period compared with late period, resident and expert. Results: Operative procedure: colon resection: 12: 5: 5: 9 (early period: late period: resident: expert), high anterior resection: 2: 2: 4: 6, low anterior resection: 12: 2: 3: 12, Miles operation Laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy is usually performed using several trocars. We report a case of a single port sleeve gastrectomy in a 42 year-old, female morbidly obese with a BMI of 42 kg/m2. Through a 2-cm single transumbilical incision Triport? was inserted and roticulator instruments were used. To retrieve the specimen we partially used the device and then grasped out of the abdominal cavity. Next day an upper gastrointestinal contrast study was done without evidence of leaks or stenoses. A full liquid diet was started and after 2 weeks following surgery the patient had lost 23 lbs. Our objective is to report the feasibility of performing a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy through a single incision using a multichannel device. pounds. An upper GI (UGI) revealed dilated gastric pouch and GG fistula, which was confirmed on endoscopy. The pouch was estimated to be 150-200 cc with a 2 cm GG fistula. The GJ stoma was also dilated. The patient elected to proceed with natural orifice surgery using the StomaphyX device. The device did not allow placement of plications directly at the fistula site but did allow placement of full-thickness fasteners in a concentric fashion from the gastrojejunostomy to the gastroesophageal junction. Pouch size was reduced to approximately 30-50 cc. Post-op UGI showed patent GG fistula, delayed flow through the GJ and marked decreased in pouch size. At 2 months post-op, the patient had regained early satiety and lost 25 pounds. Discussion: The StomaphyX device places full thickness fasteners, creating gastric plications. This can be used to shrink stoma and gastric pouch sizes. One potential drawback of the device is that its overall structure and tip length somewhat limit the operator?s ability to manipulate it. In our patient, although the gastro-gastric fistula remained open, the dilated gastric pouch and GJ stoma were successfully reduced. As a result, the restrictive portion of her procedure was recreated. Her early satiety returned and she began losing weight. The morbidity and mortality of revision gastric bypass was avoided while the patient?s goal of moderate weight loss was achieved. Conclusion: The StomaphyX is an alternative for repair of some post-bariatric complications. With the rapid advances of endoluminal technology and increasing experience with natural orifice surgery, the ability to successfully address surgical problems through less invasive means will continue to improve. Introduction: Intraabdominal surgery using a flexible endoscope combines the skills of both gastroenterologists (GI) and minimally invasive surgeons (MIS). Deficiencies in each of these standard training models include the lack of familiarity with complex intraabdominal maneuvers, for physicians with a GI background, and difficulty operating without a fixed horizon, for those with an MIS background. Materials and Methods: Nine individuals were tested; four attending gastroenterologists with advanced interventional endoscopy skills (G1), three attending laparoscopic surgeons without significant flexible endoscopy experience (G2) and two members of our NOTES lab (G3) which consists of a multidisciplinary team of surgeons and gastroenterologists. Each individual performed two timed exercises using a flexible endoscope to execute a highly demanding multistep task. The first task was performed with the horizon maintained (orientation 1: O1) and the second task was performed with the scope in retroflexion (orientation 2: O2). A mean time was calculated from 5 repetitions in each orientation. Results: G1 performed significantly better than G2 in both orientations but with repetition G2 was able to perform O1 as well as G1. O2 remained difficult for G2 even with practice. G3, regardless of background, was able to complete tasks in either orientation more rapidly than G1 or G2. Two rigid box-staple prototypes were used. The first was single-fire, reloadable, 10 mm diameter and 40 cm long, firing a titanium staple into a 3 · 5 mm ?box? shape. The second was a multi-fire, 12 mm diameter device, fitted with a distal articulating, rotating cartridge containing 20 staples that are also formed into 3 · 5 mm shapes. Three flexible shaft staplers were used through the Steerable Flex Trocar (SFT) from the NOTES Toolbox (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio). One device was 12 mm diameter and battery-powered; the other two were 8 mm and 12 mm diameter hand-fired devices. Two of the staplers were single-fire, reloadable, 40 cm long and delivered 2 · 4 mm box staples. The third device was a multifire, 120 cm long device delivering 3 · 5 mm box staples from the same articulating, rotating, cartridge used on the rigid platform. These flexible staplers were grossly guided to the appropriate anatomical location via the articulation capability of the SFT. Preliminary Results: All five stapling devices were used to successfully staple and fix mesh to the abdominal wall. As expected, use of a multi-fire device reduces the amount of time required to affix the mesh. Device rotation and articulation enabled more precise application of the staples. Further improvements in targeting and staple release are still needed. Conclusions/Expectations: Transgastric NOTES approaches for affixing hernia mesh to the abdominal wall are feasible using flexible shaft box-stapling devices -described for the first time herein -in conjunction with flexible trocars. Additionally, long, rigid, stapling devices may be used transvaginally. Although additional procedure-specific challenges still need to be addressed, notably sterile mesh delivery, ventral, and potentially inguinal, hernia procedures appear to be feasible from a NOTES approach. Purpose: Chronic pelvic pain affects many women in reproductive age in the US and laparoscopy is common in the diagnostic algorithm. In the realm of NOTES, a transvaginal approach would be a natural approach to reduce incision sites, postoperative pain and improve cosmesis in this patient population. This is the first report of transvaginal diagnostic peritoneoscopy with tissue biopsy using a flexible GI-endoscope. Methods: The study was designed as a prospective phase 1 study and approved by the institutional IRB. Inclusion criteria were women of reproductive age over 18 with a minimum 6-month pain history. A 20 year old patient fulfilled the criteria and was enrolled. Under general anesthesia and lithotomy position, a 5 mm transumbilical port was placed for laparoscopic exploration and pneumoperitoneum created. After placement of a 10 mm trocar via posterior colopotomy, a conventional gastroscope (GIF-160, Olympus) was inserted into the pelvis and peritoneoscopy performed. Results: Complete pelvic exploration was performed via transvaginal approach including uterus, adnexae, rectosigmoid, cecum and appendix. Pneumoperitoneum was maintained at 6 mm Hg. Exploration of the deep pelvis and biopsy could be achieved with the gastroscope only while laparoscopy would have required additional ports for retraction. Overall operative time was 66 minutes. Time required to gain trans-vaginal access = 17 min. Transvaginal exploration time = 34 min. Colpotomy was closed with a single running suture. The patient was discharged 2 hours after surgery. Postoperative narcotic intake included 2 mg Morphine Sulfate iv and 10 mg oxycodone po. On POD 7, pain score was 0 (VAS 0-10) with no narcotic use, cosmesis score (Dunker) indicated high satisfaction. Conclusion: Transvaginal peritoneoscopy with a flexible GI-endoscope is feasible and safe. It may provide advantages over standard laparoscopy regarding visualization, accessibility, postoperative outcome and potential as an ambulatory procedure in the future. 1. Objective of the study: A reproducible animal model for gastroesophageal reflux would aide in advancing endoscopic intralumenal therapies for GERD. In this study we performed a full thickness myotomy through the lower esophageal sphincter (LES) onto the gastric cardia incorporating our submucosal endoscopy with mucosal safety flap (SEMF) technique in efforts to establish a true reflux model. 2. Description of the methods: 1 month survival feasibility study with 6 domestic pigs. Under general anesthesia, a diagnostic endoscope (Olympus GIF-160) was advanced into the gastric cardia and the mucosa tattooed with a sterile carbon particle solution. The scope was then withdrawn to 8 cm above the LES. Our previously described SEMF technique created a submucosal working space for insertion of a cap-fitted endoscope. Dissection proceeded within this space from the esophagus onto the gastric cardia (previously tattooed). The muscularis propria was identified and divided inside the submucosal space. The myotomy was carried from 5 cm below the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) to 5 cm above. The mucosal entry site was closed with clips. Technical feasibility of a tunneled full thickness myotomy was assessed. Esophageal reflux was detected using the Bravo capsule pH detection system (Medtronic, Inc.) at four time points. 3. Preliminary results: The SEMF technique successfully accessed the muscularis propria in 5 of 6 animals. In one animal dissection into the GEJ led to perforation through the muscularis prematurely into the mediastinum. In 2 of the remaining 5 animals, submucosal dissections at the level of the GEJ led to mucosal perforation into the gastric lumen. These three animals were euthanized. All remaining animals were noted to have an increase in percent reflux time from pre-to post-myotomy (Table 1) . The SEMF technique can provide safe full thickness myotomy of the lower esophageal sphincter. The porcine GEJ may not offer an ideal anatomy to test this methodology given the difficulty extending the submucosal dissection onto the cardia. Until a more ideal animal model is identified, submucosal dissection must be carried out gently and guided posteriorly to prevent perforation into the lumenal gastric cardia. This pilot study suggests that this is a feasible technique to provide a reproducible and reliable reflux animal model. 1. Objective of the study: Improved minimally invasive lymph node sampling for cancer staging and diagnosis of mediastinal lymphadenopathy is desirable. Natural orifice approaches may offer improved minimally invasive options. We have previously reported on the technical feasibility and the potential low risk of transesophageal mediastinoscopy using the submucosal endoscopy with mucosal flap safety valve (SEMF) technique. In this study we evaluated the technical feasibility and safety of transesophageal mediastinal lymph node sampling. 2. Description of the methods: 2 week survival study with 4 domestic pigs. Under general anesthesia, mediastinal lymph nodes were identified by endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) and by marked with a sterile carbon particle solution by transesophageal FNA. A standard diagnostic endoscope was then advanced into the esophagus. High-pressure carbon dioxide submucosal injection followed by balloon dissection created a submucosal working space for insertion of a cap-fitted endoscope. Snare resection of the muscularis propria at the distal end of the submucosal tunnel allowed entrance into the mediastinum. Marked lymph nodes were identified by pararotic and paraesophageal dissection and either sampled with biopsy forceps or removed by snare. The muscular defect was sealed with the overlying mucosal flap, and the offset mucosal entry site was closed with clips. 3. Preliminary results: Lymph nodes were located and harvested in three pigs. The fourth animal was euthanized due to intraoperative respiratory distress. Harvested tissue was pathologically verified as nodal tissue and revealed inflammatory changes in 2 of the 3 animals. Endoscopy and necropsy were performed 2 weeks after the procedure. The SEMF technique provided successful access to the posterior mediastinum in all animals. Two pigs survived 2 weeks without clinical complications, and the defects were completely sealed by the mucosal flap. One of these animals had an asymptomatic mediastinal abscess. The third animal expired in the immediate post-operative period. Identification of lymph nodes was difficult in this animal prolonging the procedure. Necropsy of the two deceased animals did not reveal an operative cause of death. Introduction: As the advent of the NOTES era dawns, novel techniques for tissue retraction may be necessary to allow for safe surgical procedures to be performed. There have been multiple case reports of magnets being used to help with retraction during NOTES procedures. Most of these reports employ some type of metallic object placed on the outside of the target organ. Given that the gallbladder is a hollow viscus, we chose to attempt to inject the lumen with a liquid magnetorheologic fluid to see if retraction with this technique was possible. Methods: In a 35-kg Yorkshire female pig, we gained transvaginal access to the peritoneum with a double-channel therapeutic endoscope. The gallbladder was identified, and was grasped with an alligator forceps. It was retracted in the cephalad direction to bring it into close proximity with the abdominal wall. A 14-gauge needle was used to puncture the abdominal wall and gallbladder. 5 cc of Lord MR (magnetorheological) fluid (Lord Corp., Cary, NC) was injected directly into the gallbladder lumen. A Neodymium iron boron (Nd2Fe14B) magnet measuring 3 · 1.5 · 0.75 in was placed on the outside of the abdominal wall. The gallbladder magnetically attached to the peritoneum successfully and remained there for the entire duration of the case. Results: We employed a Nd2Fe14B magnet with a maximum flux density of 1.27 teslas resulting in a maximum field strength of 40 megagauss-oersteds. Gallbladder retraction with this strength magnet was successful. We were able to easily move the magnet around on the abdominal wall, and the gallbladder moved in concert with it. We were able to successfully dislodge the gallbladder using endoscopic tools or by lifting the magnet away from the abdominal wall. We completed the NOTES transvaginal cholecystectomy in approximately 60 minutes. No further tools were employed to aid in gallbladder retraction throughout the case. Of note, some of the Lord MR fluid leaked out of the puncture site, and this fluid was magnetically attracted to the abdominal wall, making suctioning and irrigation of this fluid quite easy. Discussion: While the use of intraluminal magnetorheological fluid is certainly a novel technique, questions about toxicity of the substance remain. A review of the MSDS sheet suggests that the substance can cause skin or lung irritation, but instructions on first aid after ingestion recommends that ingestion of water or milk is sufficient, signifying that exposure to the GI tract may be safe. Survival animal studies, as well as further information regarding toxicity would be necessary prior to human implementation of this technique. Also, storage of industrial strength magnets in the operating room environment could be problematic due to the amount of electronic instrumentation. Nevertheless, the use of intraluminal magnetic fluid as an aid to visceral retraction may have some use in NOTES procedures and should be investigated further. Background: Evaluation of a potential source of abdominal sepsis in a critically ill patient can be challenging. With flexible endoscopy being readily available in this setting, we sought to evaluate the diagnostic efficacy of a trans-gastric NOTES peritoneoscopy vs. laparoscopic exploration in the identification of common intra-abdominal pathology in a porcine model. Methods: In this acute study, 15 pigs were randomized to demonstrate 0 to 4 pathologic lesions: small bowel ischemia (SBI), Small bowel perforation (SBP), Recto-sigmoid colon perforation (CP), and gangrenous cholecystitis (GC). Two blinded surgeons were allowed 60 minutes to perform NOTES or laparoscopy (LAP) to correctly identify or exclude each lesion. A prototype endoscope (NOTES-scope, Olympus, Inc), which incorporates two independently mobile channels for aided technical ability, was used in the NOTES arm. Results: When considering all potential lesions, LAP correctly indentified or ruled out pathology only slightly better than NOTES (85% vs. 80%). LAP was also more sensitive diagnostically (77.4% vs. 61.3%), overall. However, NOTES was 100% specific with 100% positive predictive value (PPV) compared to 93.1% and 92.3% with LAP, respectively. Individually, NOTES was best at CP identification and fared poorest for SBP (see table, NPV = negative predictive value). Conclusion: The utilization of NOTES as a diagnostic tool may have an important role in the critically ill patient population when operative intervention is highly morbid. While it may be inferior in detecting all pathology compared to laparoscopy, a positive identification was highly specific with a strong predictive value. Further investigation addressing an improved small bowel evaluation technique, however, would be beneficial and warranted. A human trial considered in the current state would still mandate laparoscopic confirmation. Aim: NOTES represents an emerging technology, including under its umbrella a variety of approaches and combinations. We present 2 human patients who underwent transgastric cholecystectomy. Methods: In April 2008, 2 patients underwent transgastric cholecystectomy at our institute. The procedure entailed the use of a double-channel endoscope, a 3-mm umbilical port for retraction of gall bladder and pneumoperitoneum. Closure of gastrotomy was done with endo-clip in one patient and with suture closure using knot pusher for the other patient using an extra 5-mm port. Results: Average age was 44.5 years and mean BMI 26 kg/m2. The mean operating time was 148.5 minutes. Both patients were started on liquids on the 2nd postoperative day and discharged on the 4th postoperative day. There were no complications. Conclusion: Based on our experience, the transgastric approach seems to be a viable technique of NOTES for cholecystectomy in humans. Since the 3 mm trocar was placed in the umbilicus, there was no visible scar. Minor setbacks include lack of triangulation and cumbersome instrumentation. Currently, adequate gastrotomy closure is the most nagging problem facing the transgastric technique. Background: NOTES is the newest technique emerging in the field of surgery. We describe the transvaginal approach for endoscopic appendectomy in humans, probably the world?s first report. Materials and Methods: Out of a total of 6 patients, a totally endoscopic transvaginal appendectomy was successfully performed for 1 patient. Pneumoperitoneum was achieved via a Veress needle in the umbilicus. Peritoneal access was gained via a transvaginal approach through the posterior fornix. Results: The other 5 patients were either converted to conventional laparoscopy or aided by a laparoscope. The average age of the patients was 29.5 years. The mean operating time was 103.5 minutes. Hospital stay was 1-2 days. The vaginal wound was examined by the gynecologist and found to have completely healed during the first and second follow up. Discussion: So far in humans, transgastric appendectomy and cholecystectomy, and transvaginal cholecystectomy have been reported. A transvaginal endoscopic appendectomy in humans has not been reported yet. The technical ease of the procedure and early outcome seem satisfactory, though comparative studies are needed to confirm this. In NOTES, it is mandatory to maintain a high bacterial clearance level in the gastrointestinal tract, the route of access to intraperitoneal cavity. In NOTES that is conducted through the lower gastrointestinal tract that is convenient among routes of access to intraperitoneal cavity, it is very difficult to obtain a bacterial clearance level at which no peritonitis occurs. We invented and hereby report a high-speed cleaning unit that efficaciously cleans the gastrointestinal tract, as well as an evaluation method that uses a confocal laser observation device that can instantaneously evaluate the bacterial clearance level in the gastrointestinal tract after clearance and a digital imaging analyzer. High-speed cleaning unit: It consists of 1) a cleaning pump that has a high-speed rotating fin which cleans the balloon for sealing to ensure bacterial clearance level in the disinfected and cleaned gastrointestinal tract and its anal end, as well as of 2) a short-type straight laparoscope insertion guide for observation. Laser observation unit to evaluate bacterial clearance level: A rinse water circulation circuit for observation was designed to lead rinse water present in the gastrointestinal tract after clearance with the high-speed cleaning device onto a slide glass with a microguide for rinse water supply. It is possible to evaluate the microscopic contamination level of rinse water in the gastrointestinal tract that is delivered onto the slide in a real time basis by setting the circuit tip to the water supply nozzle of an endoscope for NOTES. The laser unit uses a digital image analyzer to distinguish bacteria from stool mass or epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract. The colon of 5 pigs was used to evaluate the macroscopic clearance level of the gastrointestinal tract and the bacterial count at the microscopic level. Consequently, we successfully verified the operable level for NOTES. This system was considered to be a useful tool for NOTES that requires the sterilization level of the gastrointestinal tract. Obsective: To assess the feasibility and safety of transgastric endoscopic assisted hepatectomy using percutaneous radiofrequency thermal energy(PRF) in a porcine model. Methods: Fourteen domestic male white pigs with a mean weight of 17.6 kg (range 15 to 21 kg) were used. Under general anesthesia a standard upper double-lumen endoscope was advanced perorally into the stomach A needle-knife was used to make an incision into the anterior wall of the stomach, followed by introduction of a guidewire into the peritoneal cavity. An 18 mm over the wire balloon was used to distend the hole, and the endoscope was pushed into the peritoneal cavity. Pneumoperitoneum was created using the channel of the endoscope. Two trocars of 0.5 cm were placed for the introduction of atraumatic graspers to hold the liver. With the porta hepatis not clamped, the preferred lobe each time was divided using PRF . The resected liver was inserted in a plastic bag and pulled out with the endoscope through the esophagus. Finally the gastrotomy was closed using three to four clips. Serum liver enzymes and blood counts were drawn pre and postoperatively. All animals were killed after 1 week. Results:The procedures performed were:2 wedge resections, 2 left lateral lobectomies, 2 right lateral lobectomies, 2 left medial lobectomies, 2 right medial lobectomies, 2 left hepatectomies and 2 right hepatectomies. The mean time of the procedures was 135 minutes and the mean mass of the resected specimen was 90 g. There were no postoperative complications or deaths. Conclusion:Transgastric endoscopic assisted hepatectomy using percutaneous radiofrquency is technically feasible and safe in the porcine model. Maki Sugimoto MD, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Stanford University, Teikyo University Introduction: Transgastric route is one of the most major accesses in NOTES. Gastric perforation has been the major challenge because of the risk of peritonitis and consequent complications. The original gastric incision is usually dilated because of the constant movement of the endoscope, the dislodgement of the endoscope from gastric orifice prolongs the procedure time. To overcome the limitations of transgastric NOTES, we developed novel prototype double balloon multi-bending dual channel flexible endoscope (DBMBDE) in transgastric surgery. We describe the feasibility of DBMBDE in 14 survival animal models. We developed a new double balloons system attached to the tip of the multibending double channel endoscope. The new double-balloon multi-bending enteroscope features two balloons and two angles, one attached between two flexible angles and the other attached to a proximal angle. When inflated with air, the balloons can grip the gastric orifice by sealing it between them. After organ phantom experiments, transgastric peritoneoscopy was performed in 10 survival porcine and canine models. A DBMBDE was inserted per orally under carbon dioxide insufflation. Gastric wall perforation was applied, the endoscope was advanced into the peritoneal cavity. Two balloons attached to the DBMBDE were inflated in and outside of the gastric wall and sealed the gastric orifice. After endoscopic abdominal exploration, jejunal resection, cecal resection, and cholecystectomy were performed, gastric wall was closed using the clips. Result: According to sealing gastric orifice between double balloons, the gastric juice leakage was completely obviated. Gastric injury was decreased due to good vascularization of the stomach. This procedure could allowed the safe performance of a controlled gastric perforation and shorten the procedure time due to fixing available scope position without further injuring the mucosa, or causing leakage of gastric secretion. No peritonitis was observed. Conclusions: DBMBDE allows the performance of a controlled perforation and provides conditions for a safe and easy closure of the gastric wall without further injuring the mucosa, or causing leakage of gastric secretion. The control of pneumoperitoneum may become easier by gastric sealing. This might potentially overcome multiple intraperitoneal limitations in NOTES, and simplifies peroral transgastric surgery, could be used to decrease invasiveness. has been used as a staging tool to evaluate the abdomen via a natural orifice. Visualization of the abdominal wall is excellent after transgastric endoscopic access. We now present our experience with transgastric endoscopic peritoneoscopy (TEP) to direct trocar placement and adhesiolysis in patients undergoing laparoscopic roux-en-y gastric bypass procedures (LSRYGB). Methods: Forty patients scheduled to undergo LSRYGB for the treatment of morbid obesity will participate. There are two arms to the study. The initial 20 patients will undergo preinsufflation of the abdomen prior to TEP. The second 20 will have no preinsufflation. Ten patients in each arm have no history of abdominal operations. The other 10 will have had previous intra abdominal procedures. TEP is performed through a gastrotomy created using an orally placed gastroscope without laparoscopic visualization. These techniques are often blind, difficult to perform, or require temporary placement of a gastrostomy tube. The objective of this study is to create a safer method of NOTES gastrotomy creation. Methods: A novel endoscopic cap suction technique was used for gastrotomy creation in 10 swine (6 non-survival, 4 survival). The prototype cap device (similar to an endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) cap) was secured to the distal end of a gastroscope and easily inserted into the stomach. At the desired site, the gastric wall was suctioned into the cap. A straight cystotome was advanced through the full thickness of the gastric wall while holding continuous suction. A guidewire was advanced through the cystotome sheath followed by balloon dilatation. The gastroscope was then advanced easily into the peritoneal cavity and peritoneoscopy was performed. In six swine, immediate sacrifice and necropsy were performed. In four survival swine, the gastrotomy was closed with endoclips and necropsy was performed on postoperative day 10. Results: Gastrotomies with easy peritoneal access were successfully created in all 10 animals. At necropsy, there was no evidence of cautery injury to surrounding organs in any of the animals. Two (20%) small splenic hematomas were found that appeared to be due to guidewire trauma. These injuries were subclinical. All 4 survived animals thrived in the postoperative period and gained weight. Conclusion:The endoscopic cap suction technique allows for a controlled, safe method of NOTES gastrotomy creation. Its benefits include ease of gastrotomy site localization from within the gastric lumen, protection from blind advancement of a cautery instrument, and elimination of the need to traverse the abdominal wall. While guidewire injury remains a concern, continued refinement of this approach may eliminate such risks. Larger studies will be needed in the future to study this promising technique. Objective: Natural orifice surgery is evolving into viable option for surgeons to have in their armamentarium. Totally NOTES operations have remained elusive due to safety concerns. The ability to safely enter the abdominal cavity blindly has remained a challenge therefore requiring one to multiple ports through the abdominal wall to observe entrance into the abdominal cavity. In our clinical NOTES cases we have placed a 3 mm trans-umbilical port for visualization of entrance into the peritoneal cavity. In a porcine model we have developed a safe, reliable and reproducible technique for a total transgastric appendectomy. Methods: Five female pigs 45-55 kg were anesthetized under standard IACUC protocols. Using the USGI transport system we entered the abdominal cavity after balloon dilating our gastrostomy site. The transport system was introduced into the peritoneal cavity and maneuvered into the pelvis for a salpingectomy, mimicking an appendectomy. The operation was completed using exclusively endoscopic instrumentation. The transport device was then retracted from the peritoneal cavity into the stomach. The original balloon, used for gastrostomy site dilation, was inflated and used to tamponade the opening to maintain pneumogastrium. while the gastrostomy site was closed using a g-Prox device. Results: All five pigs were euthanized at the end of the operation. Necropsy was performed at the conclusion of the operation. There was no damage to any of the surrounding tissue or organs from entry into the peritoneal cavity. The gastrostomy sites were closed tightly without evidence of leak. Conclusions: Safe entrance and closure of the gastrostomy site during NOTES remains a critical aspect of the further of this technique. Clinically, to maintain safety, laparoscopic ports have been placed to watch the entrance and closure. This technique allows for safe entrance and closure of the gastrostomy site as a total NOTES procedure without the use of external ports. Introduction: The purpose of this study was to determine the feasibility of transvaginal NOTES sleeve gastrectomy using novel instrumentation in a porcine model. Methods: Anesthetized pigs (non-survival (n = 7), 14-day survival (n = 1)) underwent sleeve gastrectomy procedures. Under endoscopic visualization, a 25 mm x 40 cm access port was inserted through a vaginotomy into the peritoneal cavity using blunt dissection (n = 5) or a rigid optical obturator (n = 3). A Magnetic Anchoring and Guidance System (MAGS) video camera was deployed intra-abdominally and used for subsequent visualization. A long 5 mm rigid grasper inserted transvaginally outside of the access port and a 3 mm laparoscopic grasper inserted through a transabdominal left flank trocar were used for tissue manipulation. Percutaneous T-tags were placed at the gastric fundus for retraction. A transorally placed gastroscope was used for gastric tube calibration. Prototype long (61-82 cm) transvaginal staplers were used for stomach and vascular division. Alternatively, an endoscopic bipolar sealing device was used for vascular division (n = 3). Values are mean ± S.D. Results: Operative time was 169 ± 46 minutes and blood loss was 156 ± 109 cc. The entire procedure was completed in 4 of 8 cases. Incomplete procedures were due to stapler malfunction (3 cases) and esophageal transection (1 case). Gastric division was completed in 5 of 8 cases; in 4 cases, acceptable tube geometry and volume (165 ± 34 cc) were achieved with no staple line leaks detected in 3 cases. Stapled short gastric vascular division was completed in 7 of 8 cases; bipolar vascular sealing was ineffective in 3 of 3 attempted cases. The MAGS camera was used for 100% of the procedure in 8 of 8 cases but required flexible endoscopic assistance for illumination in 2 cases when the onboard LED?s failed; significant fogging was encountered in 2 cases. At autopsy, there were 2 rectal injuries due to instrument insertion outside of the access port, 1 bladder injury due to optical obturator insertion, and 1 splenic vessel injury due to T-tag penetration. The survival animal thrived post-operatively and had no complications. Discussion: Transvaginal sleeve gastrectomy appears to be feasible in a porcine model but complications may occur when instruments are inserted without appropriate visualization or protection within a transvaginal access port. Additional device development may yield improved outcomes. Three of four would undergo the procedure again and all would recommend the procedure to others. One would not go through the procedure again because of preexisting throat problems, but would still recommend the procedure to others. Conclusions: Four weeks after undergoing transgastric cholecystectomy, patients in our series reported high quality of life scores, comparable to the general population. These scores continued to improve one year later. Satisfaction with the procedure was excellent. Transgastric cholecystectomy appears to be a safe procedure with good longterm outcomes. It will be important to see how these results translate to larger patient populations. We tested the feasibility of transvaginal placement of a large synthetic mesh (Proceed, Ethicon Inc.) without laparoscopic support to repair a porcine hernia. Methods: Three pigs were used in this survival model. Each animal had a 5 cm hernia defect formed using a standardized technique. One month later the animals had transvaginal repair of the hernia defect. Colpotomy was performed and a 12 mm trocar inserted into the peritoneal cavity. A single channel gastroscope (Olympus 8.7 mm single channel) was used for visualization. The mesh was cut to size assuring a 5 cm overlap and corner stitches were placed in the mesh with 2-0 polypropylene. The mesh was then rolled and inserted through the trocar. The preplaced sutures were externalized using a suture passer (GraNee) and an endoscopic grasper. Additional sutures were placed every 5 cm under endoscopic guidance. Outcome measures were feasibility, operative time and complications. Results: Mesh repair was feasible in all three pigs. Hernia sizes at time of mesh placement were 7 · 7 cm, 6 · 9 cm, and 9 · 15 cm. Introduction: Currently, there is no ideal specimen retrieval bag for NOTES. This study tested the efficacy and reliability of a novel through-the-scope (TTS) retrieval bag. Methods: Eleven NOTES retrieval bags (Ethicon Endo Surgery) 5.5 · 2.5 cm in size and 3.6 mm in diameter were used for these experiments. The impermeable bags have a 3.5 cm wire-supported articulating/rotating opening with cinching mechanism. Tests were conducted by an expert surgical endoscopist using a transgastric porcine model of NOTES appendectomy (uterine horn, n = 2), oophorectomy (uterine horn and ovary, n = 5), and cholecystectomy (n = 4). Success of specimen capture, time, and malfunctions were recorded. Results: There were no problems with introduction and removal of the bag and no structural defects were observed. The ease of optimal positioning alongside the specimen was acceptable utilizing the articulation and rotation features and all specimens were captured successfully. Time to secure closure averaged 2 min.10 s (range 40 s to 4:11 min). During 2 trials, the bag failed to close properly due to malfunction of the cinching mechanism. Both trials were salvaged using the flexible grasper. Conclusion:This study demonstrates acceptable performance of a novel TTS NOTES retrieval bag. Further work is needed to optimize closure and ensure consistency in manufacturing this prototype device. Such a bag may not only be useful for NOTES, but also endoluminal procedures where TTS deployment and an impermeable covering may be of particular advantage. NOTES procedures are more invasive than traditional endoscopy because they involve exiting the lumen of a hollow organ, tissue manipulation, and closure of the access site. We proposed that a novel endoscopic gastropexy utilizing a NOTES approach results in secure adhesions with few complications. To further study the impact of NOTES, we chose to evaluate the degree to which the NOTES endoscopic gastropexy affected the animals? postoperative activity level versus traditional upper GI endoscopy. A feasibility study with cross-over design was undertaken in 10 healthy dogs randomly assigned to general anesthesia and either NOTES gastropexy (n = 5) or upper GI endoscopy (n = 5). Gastric access to the abdominal cavity was achieved with PEG technique for balloon dilation. An electrocautery device was used to create an incision in the right lateral abdominal musculature. The gastric wall was secured to the abdominal wall with five to six pairs of T-fasteners deployed and secured from inside the stomach. The gastric mucosal incision was closed with the same device. A single postoperative dose of hydromorphone (0.05 mg/kg) was given. As a control, animals underwent upper GI endoscopy for examination only, with no postoperative analgesia. After a minimum of 2 weeks, the animals were crossed over to receive the other procedure. Pre-and postoperative activity monitoring was performed in both groups with a collar mounted accelerometer device (Actical? Physical Activity Monitoring System; Respironics, Inc). The median procedure time was 75 (range 52 to 182 minutes) for the gastropexy and 15 (range 8 to 40) minutes for the endoscopic examination. There were no deaths or significant complications. Preliminary statistical analysis revealed that animals undergoing the gastropexy procedures took 3 days to recover to their pre-surgical activity levels as compared to 1 day for upper endoscopy. Endoscopic evaluation two weeks after the procedure revealed intact gastropexy sites with minimal inflammation of the gastric mucosa around the suture sites. NOTES endoscopic gastropexy appears to be a reasonable alternative to traditional surgery in dogs and results in minimal impact on postoperative activity levels. Weight regain following gastric bypass has been associated with enlargement of the gastric pouch and with dilation of the gastro-jejunal anastomotic stoma. We developed a new technique for revision of the pouch and stoma using a novel endolumenal suturing device in an ex vivo model porcine stomach model. The novel prototype device is a flexible Endo Stitch? (Covidien Surgical Devices) suitable for endolumenal or NOTES applications. Barbed sutures are used to obviate the need for knot-tying. Methods: We created an 8 · 8·10 cm gastric pouch from porcine gastric explants, then an anastomosis using a 31 mm circular stapler. We measured the volume of the pouch at 30 mm H20 pressure and then measured the stoma diameter using a graduated cone. Under endoscopic guidance, we first plicated the anastomosis with a goal of reducing the diameter to between 15-18 mm. We then plicated the gastric pouch using a running suture along the lateral aspect of the pouch, with a goal of reducing the pouch size by at least 1/3. Following plication we re-measured the pouch volume and stoma diameter in the same manner. In order to assess the holding strength of the knot-less plications made with the novel knotless suture we then tested each pouch under a manometer to assess the leak pressure. Results: Stoma plication and pouch volume reduction was feasible in all ten explants. In leak pressure testing all specimens failed at the staple line rather than along the plication, at a mean leak pressure of 58.9 ± 24.7 mmHg. Conclusions: Gastric pouch reduction and stoma plication is feasible and straight forward in an ex vivo model using a novel flexible suturing device and knot-less suture. While further testing in vivo will follow, the device and technique promises to be a substantial improvement upon those currently being used clinically. Device under development. Not for sale. 1. Objective of the study: The success of natural orifice translumenal endoscopic procedures requires reliable, accurate tissue dissection and suture cutting comparable to current laparoscopic tools. A prototype flexible endoscopic scissor for tissue biopsy, dissection, enterotomy creation and suture cutting was evaluated. 2. Description of the methods: Acute study in 2 domestic pigs. Laparoscopic access provided overview and allowed comparison with laparoscopic shears. The endoscopic scissors (Apollo Endosurgery, Inc.) consist of cutting blades with a flexible wire catheter assembly (OD 3.1 mm). The device is cautery compatible, rotates with a 1:1 response and is for use within a therapeutic channel. Transgastric peritoneal access was obtained and maintained using a prototype transgastric port (Apollo Endosurgery, Inc.). A dual channel colonoscope was advanced through the gastrotomy into the peritoneal cavity. With the aide of a grasping forceps, multiple peritoneal biopsies were obtained which required the scissors to perform in a variety of endoscope positions. Cautery (Monopolar 18-30 W) was then attached to the scissors and gallbladder dissection proceeded. Once complete, the device was used to perform two small bowel enterotomies. A timed comparison of this function was made with laparoscopic enterotomy. Finally 3-0 Vicryl suture was passed through the endoscopic port and retrieved laparoscopically. At two different small bowel sites laparoscopic stitching was completed and the suture cut using the endoscopic scissors. 3. Preliminary results: Peritoneal biopsies, average size 2 cm, were obtained from multiple abdominal locations and endoscopic positions. The scissors cut effectively and accurately; cutting performance was enhanced with parallel counter traction provided by grasping forceps passed through the second endoscopic channel. The use of cautery with the scissors controlled small vessels. With the use of cautery, the gallbladder was partially dissected from the hepatic bed. This dissection required transabdominal passage of the Carter-Thompson for tissue triangulation. Small bowel enterotomy, large enough for stapler passage, was created in an average time of 4 min 54 sec. Laparoscopically this was completed in 1 min 22 sec. Suture was cut in a controlled, reproducible fashion on first attempt in all attempts. efficiently and reproducibly with the endoscopic scissors. The 1:1 rotational control improved accuracy and functionality of the scissors comparable to current laparoscopic techniques. The use of cautery worked well to seal small vessels and aided in tissue dissection. Endoscopic tissue dissection and enterotomy creation was completed effectively though less efficient compared to laparoscopy primarily due to parallel device use imposed by the dual channel endoscope. Introduction: Secure translumenal closure remains one of the fundamental barriers to the clinical introduction of NOTES. Current NOTES closure modalities do either not result in secure closure or are too challenging to apply in vivo. Gastrotomy closure using a novel over-the-scope clip (OTSC)(Ovesco) may result in secure closure and may be easy too apply. Aim was to assess the technical feasibility of gastrotomy closure using the OTSC and to compare burst strength with the surgical suture in a previously described ex vivo porcine stomach model(1). Methods: Stomachs were harvested from freshly slaughtered adult pigs. Standardized gastrotomies were made by dilating a full thickness stab incision with an 18 mm balloon for 60 seconds. After closure security was evaluated using a custom apparatus consisting of a pressurized lower chamber and saline filled upper chamber, which were separated by the sutured test specimens. After fixing the test specimen in the apparatus air was infused into the lower chamber until air bubbles could be seen coming through the gastrotomy or the adjacent gastric tissue tore. A pressure gauge and two cameras recorded the leak pressure and mode of failure respectively, with data being captured in real time by computer. Fifteen control gastrotomies were closed with #3-0 PDS in simple interrupted. This resulted in a mean leak pressure of 206 mmHg (SD 59). (1) Using a non-inferiority design a sample size of 11 specimens needed to be included in the experimental group. Closure procedure consisted of 3 steps: (1) Approximation of serosal layers using a flexible twin grasper (2) Pulling the tissue into the OTSC cap at the tip of the scope and (3) Releasing the clip. Results: Closure was successful in all specimens in a median of 3 minutes. Closed gastrotomies using the OTSC showed air leakage at a mean pressure of 224 mmHg (SD 61), which was non inferior in comparison with the predetermined gold standard (p = 0.003). Conclusion: Use of OTSC for gastrotomy closure is feasible, easy to apply and provides burst pressures comparable with hand-sewn closure. In vivo survival experiments will need to be performed to further evaluate the technique in real life. Background: Megachannel? is a new colonic access system that was originally developed for colonoscopic appendectomy. Once in place, the reinforced wall protects the colon from perforation risks during rapid, multiple passes of the colonoscope to the right colon. The 20 mm working channel allows the rapid and safe delivery of bulky instruments such as EUS, banders, suction cups and staplers. Additionally this large working channel also allows the removal of large specimens piece by piece. After completion of animal and cadaver tests, the aim of this study was to evaluate safety and clinical feasibility in patients undergoing colonoscopy. Methods: Patients scheduled for colonoscopy due to suspected right colonic polypoid lesions were screened and included after written informed consent. The colonic access device (22 outer diameter, 100 cm in length) was constructed of a wire reinforced polyvinylchloride plastisol tube with a thermoplastic distal tip and a proximal hub with integrated scope seal. A rounded introducer plug was fitted onto the distal tip and formed a smooth solid surface between the overtube and colonoscope to prevent tissue entrapment. For all studies, the overtube was loaded onto a 160 cm lower GI endoscope (Pentax and Olympus) and introduced via colonoscopic guidance Results: The Megachannel? was applied in 40 patients (19 female, mean age 48a) undergoing colonoscopy. The cecum was reached in 34/40 patients within 16 min (3 to 35 min), with 73 cm (60 to 90 cm) of the overtube being inserted into the colon. Mild tissue bruises were observed in 9 patients, mild to moderate pain was reported in 5. In 27 patients the Megachannel? assisted the removal of multiple polyps as tissue was repeatedly retrieved through the device. In one patient a EUS scope was delivered for evaluation of tumor wall infiltration before submucosal resection, in another patient a suction cap was successfully delivered to the right flexure for removal of an incomplete-lifting polyp. Conclusions: This new colonic access system (Megachannel?) can be safely applied into the right colon and is useful for a variety of colonic interventions that require multiple insertion of the scope (such as removal and retrieval of multiple polyps) or delivery of bulky instruments such as EUS, suction caps or banding devices. This instrument might support NOTES procedures and removal of colonic stents. The final instrument length was changed to 80 cm. Optical was introduced in the abdominal cavity transvaginally, as well as a 10 mm trocar in parallel, also transvaginally. There was combined endoscopic and laparoscopic dissection. There were 2 umbilical punctures for use of 3 mm laparoscopic equipment. The posterior colpotomy was closed with chromic sutures. Results: Operative time ranged from 85-260 min. Mean operative blood loss was estimated of 44 ml, mostly from vaginal access. Mean abdominal CO2 pressure was 13 mmHg. The total abdominal incision lenghts was 2 · 3 mm on umbilical scar. There was also 3 of the gallbladder done from top down because the rigid instruments from the vagina limit the exposure of the gallbladder. The patients recovered well postoperatively, oral intake was began on the next day. The first four patients were dismissed on the third postoperative day, and the last patient was dismissed on the first postoperative day. There was need of Tramadol 50 mg in 4 patients, and one patient claimed of vaginal discomfort. There were no postoperative complications. Conclusions: Tranvaginal NOTES is a feasible and safe alternative method for cholecystectomy in this preliminary clinical experience. Available technology is still limited for natural orifice surgery, however this approach strongly suggests better cosmetic results and less pain. Background: A current limitation in utilizing the stomach as a primary point of access for NOTES is the availability and reliability of the closure devices. The majority of devices described in recent reports are at an investigative or prototype only stage. Here we describe a reliable closure technique using readily available on-shelf endoscopic tools with a modified ?clip-and-loop? closure in a porcine model. Methods: Animals were placed under general anesthesia in a supine position. First, a Seldinger technique was used to endoscopically place a guidewire in the anterior stomach. Two transfascial sutures were then percutaneously passed into the stomach on either side of the guidewire using a laparoscopic suture-passer. Their tails were tagged loosely and left extracorporally. The gastrotomy was then created adjacent to the guidewire using needle knife cautery and a dilating balloon to facilitate passage of the endoscope. A brief peritoneoscopy was performed, and the endoscope was returned into the stomach. Tension was then applied to the transfascial sutures which tented the gastrotomy against the anterior abdominal wall to improve gastric insufflation. Next, endoscopic clips (Quick-clip, Olympus Inc.) were placed in pairs opposite each other at the edges of the gastrotomy. Then finally, using an endoscopic loop (Poly-Loop, Olympus, Inc.), the individual pairs were encircled and cinched together closing the gastrotomy in a zipper-like fashion. Transfascial sutures were removed at the completion, and an upper gastrointestinal fluoroscopy was performed to confirm seal. Repeat fluoroscopy was performed on days 2 and 7 post-operatively. Gastric burst tests were performed on post-operative day 14 at necropsy. Results: Ten animals were studied and survived for 14 days. Mean procedure times were 02:20 (minutes:seconds) for placement of the pre-gastrotomy transfacial sutures and 16:53 for the closure (n = 9). One procedure time was lost due to technical malfunction in recording. Two sets of pairs (4 clips and 2 endoscopic-loops) were required for closure in all but the first animal which took 3. Thirteen clips were lost secondary to misfire with 7 attributed to the first animal when developing the technique. Fluoroscopy imagings were negative for all animals. Necropsy results revealed no abscesses, though gastrotomy site granulomas (n = 3) and adhesions (n = 1) were sporadically found. Bursting pressures ranged from 32-108 mmHg with a mean of 81.7 mmHg. Conclusion: A modified clip-and-loop closure using endoscopic loops to zipper clips together provided a simple and efficient closure in this animal model. The utilization of temporary transfascial sutures certainly enhanced insufflation ability, and thus provided an improved working environment for the closure. Continued investigation into improved techniques implementing tools readily available in the endoscopy suite could improve the slow progression of NOTES that is currently dependent mainly on investigative devices. Furthermore, the application of transfascial sutures may improve other technically challenging closures where insufflation ability plays a major role. Before natural orifice translumenal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) can be safely introduced for human use in the United States, several technical and physiologic factors need to be elucidated. Among these are the host systemic and peritoneal responses to inflammation. The inflammatory response to laparoscopy (LAP) has been well characterized, and has been shown to favorably alter immune function when compared to laparotomy. However, the immunologic effects of NOTES are yet to be determined. In addition, the introduction of contaminants via the host oropharynx, combined with an endoscopic gastric closure, may alter host peritoneal flora. We have characterized the effect that NOTES will have on porcine systemic and peritoneal immune function. Twenty-four pigs were divided into three groups: Group A (upper endoscopy-control), Group B (LAP), and Group C (NOTES). Group A underwent general anesthesia with upper endoscopy, Group B transabdominal pneumoperitoneum and closure, and Group C endoscopic gastrotomy, transgastric pneumoperitoneum and endoscopic closure. All animals had blood (systemic) and peritoneal lavage (peritoneal) samples collected for cytokine analysis, drawn preoperatively (time 0), at the termination of the first procedure (60 minutes), and at 48 hours. The endoscopic gastric closure was inspected at 48 hours. Interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-10 (IL-10), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha), and interferon gamma (IFN gamma) levels were quantified using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Paired t-test and Wilcoxon signed-rank test were used to compare the cytokine levels at various times after each of the surgical procedures. Peritoneal lavage samples were cultured and identified by group and time of collection. For all groups, TNF alpha levels were elevated at 60 minutes, and subsequently returned to baseline at 48 hours (p < 0.01). IFN gamma, IL-6, and IL-10 were not found above assay levels in any group. IL-1 levels were found in substantial amounts at t = 0 and t = 60 minute samples only in the NOTES group. At 48 hours, similar IL-1 levels were found between the LAP and NOTES groups. Similar microbiologic contaminants were found between all groups. At 48 hours, the NOTES group did not exhibit infection, and culture counts returned to baseline. Not all cytokines were found in appreciable levels in porcine serum or peritoneal fluid. For measurable cytokines, the NOTES peritoneal cytokine response was not significantly different from the LAP group. NOTES did not carry a significantly increased amount of microbiologic contamination compared to LAP at 48 hours. These data suggest that the peritoneal immune response to NOTES does not significantly differ from LAP in a porcine model. Methods: Blood vessels of various types and diameters were harvested from three pigs under anesthesia using three instruments: LigaSure AtlasTM with LigaSureTM Vessel Sealing Generator (LSAt), Lig-aSure AtlasTM with Force TriadTM Generator (LSAtFT) and EndoclipTM II (Autosuture, USSC, CO; a division of Tyco Healthcare). The inferior mesenteric, splenic, hepatic, renal, iliac, and femoral arteries were obtained. In total, 40 arteries were harvested and fatty and connective tissues were removed from the adventitia before sealing. The diameter of each vessel was measured with digital calipers from the outside edge of the adventitia. The diameters of the vessels, speed and adequacy of the cutting and sealing process, burst pressure, and burst point were compared. Burst pressure was measured in mm Hg. An additional set of specimens was sealed and then histopathologically examined to assess the degree of thermal injury. Results: The mean burst pressure was significantly higher in the LSAtFT group than in the LSAt group (p < 0.01). The mean burst pressure did not differ significantly for 2-4 mm or 4-7 mm vessels. The sealing process was significantly shorter with LSAtFT (p < 0.001). As for the degree of thermal injury, adventitial collagen denaturation and proximal thermal injury of the smooth muscle in the media were less common with LSAtFT; however, the number of vessels examined was too small for statistical analysis. Conclusion: Both the LSAt and LSAtFT proved useful regardless of the vessel size and sealing resisted pressures well above the physiologic levels. The LSAtFT can be used more confidently in vessels up to 7 mm. Our findings indicate that LigaSure AtlasTM with Force TriadTM Generator is a safer and more effective means to attain hemostasis during advanced laparoscopic surgery. Introduction: Because of the risk of herniation, all port sites are recommended to be closed after laparoscopic surgery. However, port-site closure is difficult especially in obese case. Full-thickness closure of trocar wound is a time-consuming and frustrating task. A lot of devices for this closure have been introduced. However, they are not cost-effective. We report a new simple technique for this troublesome task. Methods: An inner needle of 16-gauge venous catheter is used for this technique. To reduce the risk of bleeding and of cutting the suture, the tip of the needle is blunted by using something. A 75 cm 2-0 absorbable bladed suture is placed through the needle. The both ends of the suture are pulled back in the direction of the hub. The trocar is removed. Pneumoperitoneum is maintained with a finger. The needle and the suture are introduced into the peritoneal cavity sufficiently through the fascia under laparoscopic monitoring. The needle is then pulled back slightly and a loop is made by the friction of the suture. A laparoscopic grasper is inserted into this loop through the trocar site. The needle still holding the suture is pulled out and is reintroduced into the peritoneal cavity through the opposite side of the fascia. The 2nd loop is made as described above. This loop is held and is pulled out from the trocar site through the 1st loop by the grasper. Next, the 1st loop is withdrawn outside the abdomen, and the 2nd loop and its edge come along with it. Finally, both edges of the suture are tied up to close the fascia. Results: This technique was applied to both 5 mm and 12 mm trocar sites successfully. It took about 2 minutes to close each site. Conclusion: This technique provides a simple, easy, and inexpensive fascia closure for all trocar sites after laparoscopic surgery. Gyusung Lee PhD,Nora Meenaghan MD, David Dexter MD, Tommy Lee MD, F. Jacob Seagull PhD,Carlos Godinez MD, Adrian Park MD, University of Maryland Introduction: Surgeon-technology interfaces are a vital factor contributing to ergonomic risk. The display monitor is one such interface associated with physical eye and neck symptoms experienced by laparoscopic surgeons. The development of new technologies has permitted the traditional CRT display stationed on an instrument cart to be replaced by LCD system located on a boom. In the largest North American survey of its type to date, we investigated whether laparoscopic surgeons really benefit in terms of better ergonomics and reduced physical symptoms from the newer display systems. Methods and Procedures: 317 laparoscopic surgeons currently in practice participated in this online survey study. This comprehensive, 23-question survey addressed four categories: demographics, physical symptoms, ergonomics, and environment/equipment. Data were analyzed using chi-square and logistic-regression. Results: Neck stiffness (49%) and eye fatigue (31%) were among the most prominent symptoms. 67.4% of participants reported using an LCD system though 25% of participants still have the monitor cart mounted. Surprisingly, our study data showed that the percentage of participants experiencing eye strain and neck stiffness did not differ in terms of display type or mountings (p > 0.05, p > 0.05). 71% of stationary display users as well, surprisingly, as 48% of those with mobile mounts still requested improvements in regard to monitor positioning. While 65% of CRT users asked for better resolution, it is notable that 48% of LCD users also wanted to have improved resolution. No significant differences were found between CRT and LCD users in terms of their demands for improvements regarding display monitor size, color, and number. Conclusions: Monitor placement has been assumed to be a major factor contributing to ergonomic risk. The LCD display mounted on a mobile boom has been considered to offer the best ergonomic option available. That MIS surgeons, however, still report eye and neck issues and demand improvements both in terms of the currently used boom mount and higher resolution LCD display technology suggests that more ergonomic research in addition to such feedback being delivered to industry partners are necessary in the face of this still unresolved and ergonomically risky surgeontechnology interface. Introduction: The disadvantage of endoscopic surgery (laparoscopic surgery, NOTES, etc.) is the narrow operative field provided by a single endoscope. The broad-view camera system (BVCS) has been developed with the aim of providing a wide-ranging view by using miniature camera units located on the inside of the patient?s body. The BVCS can automatically record not only the overview of a surgical operation but also the movements of the surgical instruments by using quantitative analysis based on image processing. Methods/Procedures The BVCS consists of several camera units, a display, and a PC. The newly developed camera unit is composed of a small CMOS camera (8.7 · 8.7 · 10.0 mm) and an indwelling needle for fixing to the body wall (phi 0.8 · phi 1.3 · 100 mm). In a preliminary animal experiment that simulated laparoscopic surgery, a single camera unit was used to verify the feasibility of the BVCS. First, the camera unit was inserted through a 10 mm trocar. Next, the needle was punctured up to the abdominal wall of the pig by using forceps and the unit was fixed on the inner wall of abdomen. Subsequently, the 3 wires of the camera (image signal, 12 V, and GND) were pulled through from the needle protruding from the pig?s body, and connected to the display and the PC. Results: The visualized area using the BVCS was approximately 6 times larger than that visualized using an endoscope. Through the operation, the endoscope, the 2 forceps, and the colon of the pig were continuously monitored. It was confirmed that the trajectory of forceps can be detected in real-time by a PC that processes the captured images. During this experiment, lens of the camera did not mist over because of the surgical conditions such an incision with a radio knife. Conclusions: We confirmed the usability of the BVCS in animal experiments. We think that the proposed system has momentous potential for use as a visual-navigation system during endoscopic surgery. In the future work, several camera units will be used in preclinical experiments. Methods and Procedures: A curvilinear sub-umbilical incision was made. An incision was made in the linea alba and 5 mm port was inserted under vision. Pneumo peritoneum was created. 5 mm 30 degree telescope was passed. Two more 5 mm ports were inserted on either side.They were spaced as much apart from each other as the incision allowed. A grasping forceps was manually bent into gentle S shape. The left port was pulled out and the bent grasping forceps was inserted directly into the abdomen. Through the right port, 5 mm harmonic shear and 5 mm hemo clip applier were used. We have performed total 12 procedures -5 cholecystectomies and 7 appendectomies. Additional 2 mm port was inserted in the upper abdomen for difficult cholecystectomy. Results: All the procedures were successfully completed. The disadvantage was that the instruments clashed. The LESS scar in the umbilicus healed so well that at the end of 7 days, the abdomen looked scarless as in NOTES. A lack of understanding the ergonomics of laparoscopic surgery has a potential to pose health problems for the surgeons. This study was planned to asses the prevalence of ergonomic problems associated with laparoscopy. Questionnaires designed to asses the frequency and degree of physical discomfort practicing surgeons during laparoscopy were evaluated in 210 cases.The average age of surgeons was 48.2 years(28-65), 31.5% of them play any racket sports.Most of them (79.5%) use single monitors and can?t alter the height of the monitor(85.2%).The camera is usually held by assistant surgeon(71.2%).The answer for number of operative/advanced laparoscopic procedures per months were as follow:1-5(35.8%), 6-10(38.5%),11-15(17.5%) and more than 15 (8.2%).The following problems were experienced during or after performing laparoscopic procedure:eye strain ( Objective: Standard rigid laparoscopes have a fixed-angle of view and flexible-tip laparoscopes require external deflection of the tip to alter the viewing angle; therefore requiring additional room for maneuverability in restricted spaces. The purpose of this study is to compare the optical properties and characteristics of fixed-angled laparoscopes and an externally deflectable, flexible-tip laparoscope to an internally deflectable, variable-view laparoscope. Methods: A forward-viewing (0-degree), forward-oblique (30-degree) and flexible-tip laparoscope (LTF-Type V3, Olympus) were compared to a variable-view, internally deflectable laparoscope (EndoCameleon?, Karl Storz Endoscopy). Quantitative comparisons of optical properties were evaluated at 3 cm from a scaled target (Table) . Subsequently, 17 medical personnel [surgery attendings (n = 3), medical students (n = 5), surgery residents (n = 9)] utilized a Likert scale [1lowest, 5-highest) to evaluate image size, image clarity (25%/100% light intensity) and image border, color reproduction and close-up (3 cm from target) and distant (10 cm from target) focus in an inanimate abdominopelvic model (Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon, WA). The ease and range of distal tip deflection was compared between the flexible-tip and internally deflectable, variable-view laparoscope. Data are given as means. Statistical significance (p < 0.05) was determined using Friedman?s non-parametric test and analysis of variance. Results: The flexible-tip laparoscope was rated lower (p < 0.05) than the 30-degree laparoscope in color reproduction, 0-degree laparoscope in close-up focus, the 0-degree and 30degree laparoscopes in distant view focus and image border, and the 0-degree, 30-degree and variable-view laparoscope in image clarity with 25% light intensity. All laparoscopes had similar (p = ns) image clarity with 100% light intensity. The 0-degree laparoscope had a better (p = 0.01) image size than the variable-view laparoscope. The variable-view laparoscope was rated as significantly (p < 0.01) better in regards to distal tip deflection than the flexible-tip laparoscope. Conclusions: The image range (cm) with internal deflection of the variable-view laparoscope is greater than that with external deflection of the flexible-tip laparoscope. The fixed-angled and variable-view laparoscopes were rated similarly and would not be discriminated against in regards to optical characteristics. The externally deflectable, flexible-tip laparoscope had poor optical characteristics compared to a 0-degree, 30-degree and variable-view laparoscope. Background: Cloudiness and dirt on a tip of endoscopy are one of the causes to stop an operation. An operator feels great stress from this trouble in order to perform a best operation. In this paper we present a new system to solve this problem. There are two kinds of problem on the tip of endoscope, one is cloudiness, the other is attachment of suspended matter, such as mist or smoke. Especially mist produced by a laparoscopic coagulation sears is severe problem. Many surgeons often open a valve to remove mist from an abdominal cavity and ventilate CO2. The temperature of abdominal cavity goes down because CO2 gas from an inflator is around 18 centigrade. This causes the lens of scope tend to more cloudiness. Material and Methods: We developed CO2 gas conditioning system to recycle CO2 gas and insufflate worm CO2 gas at 40 l/min. The performance of this system was evaluated in the pig lab. The temperature and humidity were recorded at the outlet and inlet. The lens stain was checked in the various situations, such as around electrocautery and LCS. Results: The lens was not stained by a mist even at the 3 cm in front of activated LCS, because CO2 gas made protector around a lens like an air curtain. Conclusion: This system will be generally used in the laparoscopic surgery, not only because ordinal trouble of laparoscopy was cleared, but because of prevention of global warming. Peter C Ng MD, Yale D Podnos MD, Linda S Oleson,James A Baker, SurgRx, Redwood City CA Introduction: Temperature-controlled vessel sealers generate strong vessel welds and maintain a high safety profile. Combining focused bipolar RF energy, tissue compression, and time these devices forge collagen welds in 7 mm vessels with a burst strength averaging 800 mmHg. A novel technology enables precise temperature control at a molecular level, thus preventing overheating, char, and local thermal spread. This study compares temperature-controlled and uncontrolled bipolar devices against high conductive, collagen rich (arterial) and low conductive, collagen poor (venous) systems, seeking to distinguish differences in heat characteristics, energy delivery, and seal consistency. Methods: Using identical power sources in a side-by-side bench model, a 5 mm temperature-controlled bipolar vessel sealer (EnSeal?, SurgRx?) and a 5 mm temperature-uncontrolled bipolar vessel sealer (Ligasure?, Valleylab?) were used to seal harvested porcine vessels. First, ten 6 mm arteries were sealed and each vessel sealer was individually supplied with continuous uniform energy for 2 minutes. Ten veins (3-5 mm) were then similarly tested. In each vessel type, current, voltage, impedance, and power were measured (ThermaCam? Researcher Pro). Temperature measurement and heat output were assessed by high definition infrared camera (FLIR ThermoVision? A320G). Results: This experiment demonstrated superior thermal control in both arteries and veins for the temperature-controlled device. It maintained a consistent 100°C ± 20% compared to a continuous rise in temperature to 190°C in the uncontrolled device during the allotted energy delivery (p < 0.05). The impedance curves demonstrated more efficient energy transfer in the temperature-controlled device, maintaining a constant power output. The uncontrolled devices, in contrast, produced high voltage spikes with regular variance in tissue impedance. Conclusions: This experiment demonstrated the superior ability of temperature-controlled devices to affect and maintain optimal safe tissue temperatures for vessel sealing. By doing so, the incidences of superheating tissues and unintended power surges are mitigated. Safety is improved, as the formula for safe and effective vessel sealing includes dense tissue compression, a targeted heating process to effect collagen denaturation, and the ability to maintain consistent desiccation temperatures over time. Esophageal / Gastric Surgery OBJECTIVES -Achalasia is an uncommon disease of esophageal motility, characterized physiologically by failure of the lower esophageal sphincter to relax upon swallowing, and the absence of effective peristalsis in the body of the esophagus. Although the incidence of achalasia is low, the burden of suffering is high because it is a chronic incurable disease that predominantly affects young persons. This paper aims to describe the impact of achalasia on patient cost burden, time dedicated to treatment and work productivity. METHODS AND PROCEDURES -Consecutive patients from 4 general surgery practices across Canada (whose clinical and manometric diagnosis was confirmed) were invited to participate in a clinical trial comparing laparoscopic myotomy with pneumatic dilatation. Baseline data collection at enrollment involved a selection of standardized patient-reported outcomes instruments including the Healthcare Utilization Questionnaire (HUQ) and the Achalasia Severity Questionnaire (ASQ Division of esophagus and esophago-jejunostomy in Roux-en-Y anastomosis is a critical procedure in total gastrectomy. The more proximal the site of esophagus division is, the more difficult it is to perform the procedures successfully under the historical open laparotomy. Here, we demonstrate that under laparoscopic total gastrectomy those procedures are much more easily completed. Patients and Procedure: Among thirty-five laparoscopic total gastrectomy cases during the last eighteen months, we have six cases with esophageal invasion. Operation was performed with five ports. Esophagus was separated from diaphragm and thoracic esophagus was pulled down into abdomen. Before division of esophagus, an anvil head of a circular stapler was placed on esophagus by EST (efficient purse-string stapling technique) method (Omori, T., Am J Surg, in press). Briefly, incision was made on the anterior wall of the esophagus. This incision was placed at 1 cm-distal from a point to be divided. The anvil head bearing, on a trocar attached to its center rod, 2-0 monofilament suture with needle was inserted into proximal esophagus. The needle was put through the anterior wall to outside of the esophagus at 0.5 cm-proximal from the point of division. The esophagus was divided with linear stapler and finally the anvil head was secured at the end of the proximal esophagus. After total gastrectomy, the resected stomach was removed and Roux-en-Y anastomosis with a circular stapler was performed through a 4 cm transrectal laparotomy. In all of the cases at least 4 cm of esophagus was resected, which made the esophago-jejunostomy placed at the same level of the esophageal hiatus or in the thorax. The implementation of a MIP has significantly increased the number of surgical procedures for esophageal achalasia at our institution. These cases can be performed with a low morbidity and conversion rate. Initially, we saw a significant increase in number of procedures from the local population. Over time and with increasing volume we have witnessed a significant increase in distance traveled as our facility has became a regional referral center. Mansoor A Khan, Elghellal Khaleel, Smythe Anne, Globe Jenny, Ackroyd Roger, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK Abstract Background: Many trials have undertaken Intra-oesophageal manometry (IEM) as a measurement of adequacy of fundoplication. The aim of this pilot study was to assess the value of IEM in predicting post-operative dysphagia. Methods: Forty patients underwent IEM studies prior to operative correction of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease and repeat studies 3 months post procedure. During the procedure, IEM studies were undertaken prior to pneumoperitoneum being established, post pneumoperitoneum, post pneumoperitoneum with fundoplication and post fundoplication without pneumoperitoneum. All patients were followed up at 1, 6 and 12 months post procedure to assess for persistent symptomatic reflux and post fundoplication dysphagia. Results: Three patients demonstrated persistent dysphagia at the 12 month follow up point. There were no statistically significant differences in the preoperative manometry studies in the dysphagia/non-dysphagia groups, with the dysphagic group having higher pressures. However, at operation, there were statistically significant differences in the lower oesophageal sphincter pressures: Post anaesthetic and no pneumoperitoneum (  Koji Hattori PhD, Yukio Terashita PhD, Ryouta Mori PhD, Shinichiro Saito MD, Nagoya Kyoritsu Hospital Nagoya-city Japan [Introduction] In laparoscopically assisted total gastrectomy (LATG), Roux-Y (RY) reconstruction has been performed. We have performed pouch with Roux-en-Y (PRY) reconstruction in LATG on eight cases since 2007. We demonstrated the techniques in the surgical procedure by photos and compared them with those used in the RY method. [Point of the procedure] Under the laparoscope, the jejunum was marked at the position of 20 cm and 80 cm from the Treitz ligament (Treitz lig.), and a 6 cm midline incision was made in the epigastric region. The 20 cm jejunum from the Treitz lig. was dissected outside the incision, forming a Y-shaped anastomosis to the 80 cm jejunum, which was placed back in the abdominal cavity. An inverted J-shaped pouch 15 cm in length was formed outside the incision, which was anastomosed to the esophagus under direct vision. A His? angle was formed, and the elevated jejunum was connected to the duodenal stump with sutures. [Results] The average reconstruction time during the operation was 78 minutes in the PRY method and 53 minutes in the RY method; both methods had no postoperative complications. The average durations of postoperative hospitalization were 6.2 days in the PRY method and 5.8 days in the RY method. Six months after the operation, the oral intake of one meal was more than two-thirds in all cases who underwent the PRY method compared with that before the operation. Introduction: Laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery is the gold standard for surgical treatment of GERD and a well defined learning curve for the procedure has been described. Aim of this study is to assess if the surgeons experience has an effect on one year symptom scores and patient satisfaction. Methods: All patients undergoing anti-reflux surgery are entered into a prospectively maintained database, including one year post-operative symptom scores. The database was queried in May 2008 to identify patients who had had one year follow-up. To decrease variability patients with large HH (>5 cm), Para-esophageal hernia, required Collis gastroplasty or underwent trans-thoracic procedure were excluded. Results: From September 2003 to May 2007 215 consecutive patients underwent primary anti-reflux surgery, of these 171 patients (103 women, mean age was 51.5 ?} 14.0, 18-87) met inclusion criteria and were divided into 3 equal groups : early (9 / 2003 -11 / 2004), mid (11 / 2004 -12 / 2005) , and late (12 / 2005 -3 / 2007) group. There was significant decrease in mean-operative time (p < 0.05), hospital stay (p < 0.02) and post-operative complications (p < 0.05) with experience. Additionally the number of patients who required re-operative intervention also decreased significantly with less patients requiring re-operative surgery as experience increased. There was no difference in one year patient reported symptom scores for heartburn (mean; 0.3 ?} 0.7, median; 0), regurgitation (mean; 0.1 ?} 0.4, median; 0) and dysphagia (mean; 0.3 ?} 0.6, median; 0). Overall patient reported satisfaction was (mean; 8.9 ?} 1.9, median; 10) (p = 0.54) (scale of 1 -10) and 13.6 (19 / 140) % of patients reported use of acid suppression medications. Conclusion: Decrease in need for re-operative procedures is noted with increasing procedures however patient reported symptom scores do not change with experience. A high degree of one year patient resolution and satisfaction can be achieved even early in experience. Introduction: The objective of this study is to determine the feasibility of laparoscopic management of gastric submucosal tumors located at the gastroesophageal junction. Methods and Procedures: A retrospective, longitudinal study was designed including 13 patients operated on in our department from November 1999 to December 2007. Fifty three percent of patients were males, mean patients 0 age was 57,4 ± ,13,8 years and mean BMI was 31,1 ± ,4,5 kg/m2. Preoperative work-up included EGD, CT-Scan, EUS (FNA in 5 patients). Results: One patient who had a 3 cm tumor located posteriorly required conversion to open surgery because of difficult exposure and visualization of the tumor. All other cases were completed laparoscopically, and surgical procedure was a wedge resection in 7 patients, enucleation in 4 and laparoscopic transgastic resection in 1. Endoscopic assistance was used in all cases except one. Mean operative blood loss was 142.5 ± 111.8 ml. Mean operative time was 243.7 ± 84.8 minutes. None of the patients developed postoeprative complications and all of them tolerated oral diet after a mean of 1.67 ± ,0,78 days. Mean postoperative stay was 2,58 ± ,0,99 days. Surgical pathology revealed a leiomyoma in 6 patients, GIST in 2, lipoma in 1, and non-specified stromal tumor in 1. All GIST tumors were c-kit and CD-34 positive. Mean tumor?s size was 3,7 ± ,1,2 cm. The non specified stromal tumor was not studied with immunohistochemical analysis as was operated on 2000, and immunohistochemical study was not performed. Nevertheless, the absence of mitotic activity, tumor necrosis or atypia confirmed the benign nature of the tumor. DUring follow-up none of the patients have developed a recurrence of the disease. Conclusions: Laparoscopic management of submucosal tumors at the gastroesophageal junction should be attempted. Wefge resection and enucleation are sefe procedures, avoiding theneed of performing a gastrectomy. This approach is related to a fast recovery and low morbidity. The combination of laparoscopy and endoscopy is useful for tumor localization. Objective: Post-fundoplication recurrence of symptoms occasionally requires surgical correction. Our objective is to review our initial experience with Roux-en-Y (RNY) reconstructions for failed anti-reflux surgery. Method: After Institutional Review Board approval, a retrospective review of data was performed on patients who had undergone RNY gastrojejunostomy or esophagojejunostomy, with or without gastric resection, after failure of previous fundoplications. Results: Twenty-two patients underwent re-operative procedures with RNY anastomoses either to the esophagus (n = 4) or to a small gastric pouch (n = 18) from January 2004 to September 2007. Recurrence of reflux (n = 7) or severe dysphagia (n = 7) were the main indications in the majority of patients (62%) requiring reoperation. Most patients had 1 previous procedure, while 6 patients had two and 2 patients had three previous anti-reflux procedures. Sixteen (73%) of our RNY reconstructions were done via laparotomy and six (27%) with a laparoscopic approach. Ten patients (45%) had major or minor complications within the 30-day postoperative period. No post-operative mortality was observed. At a mean follow-up of twenty-three months, the mean heartburn score was 0, the regurgitation score was 0 and the mean dysphagia score was 1. The mean postoperative BMI was 25.4 compared to a preoperative BMI of 31. Conclusion: RNY reconstructions are effective and safe as remedial surgical procedures in a select group of patients with previously failed anti-reflux surgeries. They are associated with a significant morbidity. Introduction: Recently some studies suggested that sentinel node biopsy (SNB) can be also applied to gastric cancer. We apply sentinel lymph node biopsy in laparoscopy-assisted distal gastrectomy (LADG) to perform it as safe limited surgery. Limited surgery is a procedure in which the extent of lesion resection and lymph node dissection is reduced. We demonstrate that intraoperative diagnosis of lymph node metastasis is useful in this regard. Surgical procedures: Patent blue (1%) is injected submucosally into 4 to 5 different sites at 1 mL per site around the primary tumor. Blue-stained lymphatics and lymph nodes(BNs) can been seen by turning over the greater omentum and lesser omentum extraperitoneally. If blue nodes are found, biopsy is performed at this point. Since BNs identification takes time as mentioned above, no specific time restriction is set for the procedures from submucosal injection of patent blue to BN biopsy. Subjects and methods: SNB has been performed in our institution since November 1999. Introduction: Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication is accepted as a standard and effective therapy for refractory GERD; however, controversy exists regarding the eficacy of Nissen fundoplication in obese patients. We report on the results of symptomatic outcomes of a series of obese and non-obese patients with GERD receiving laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication. Methods: A single center retrospective review of initial adult laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication from November 2001 through May 2008. Weight, QOLRAD questionnaire (Quality of Life in Reflux and Dyspepsia), antacid use and symptoms were recorded pre-operatively, and at 3 months and 12 months post-operatively. An antacid use index was constructed based on the type and multiplicity of use. A symptom score index was determined based on the presence of: heartburn, regurgitation, dysphagia, bloating, epigastric pain and/or respiratory symptoms. Statistical analysis of groups was performed using two-tailed t-test. Results: 289 patients (F = 169, M = 120), with a mean age of 49.5 ± 13.6 years (20 -83 years) underwent initial laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication for GERD. Length of hospital stay (LOS) was 1.14 days (STD 0.53). There was no operative mortality. Reduction in BMI, antacid use and symptoms, and improvement in QOLRAD score at twelve months was statistically significant. However, there were no statistically significant difference in the response of patients with BMI < 35, BMI 35.1-39.9, BMI > 40. Conclusions: Significant improvment in outcomes of Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication were demonstrated for symptoms score, antacid use and QOLRAD. However, there was not a significant difference in the symptomatic improvement following laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication between obese and non-obese patients. Introduction: Achalasia is an uncommon disease of unknown origin. Management is challenging. Laparoscopic esophageal myotomy is the best treatment option, having variable results. We report the medium-term outcomes on 16 patients after Laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication. Methods and Procedures: This is a descriptive, retrospective study evaluating the clinical outcomes of all patients undergoing laparoscopic Heller myotomy and partial fundoplication for achalasia in two hospitals affiliated to our university from February 2000 to January 2008. Results: A total of 18 patients had surgery for achalasia. 2 patients were lost on follow up. We interviewed and reviewed the medical records of 16 patients. Mean follow-up was 30.6 months (range 3-96). Mean length of hospital stay was 3.1 days (1-5). There was no mortality and no conversion to open surgery was necessary. All patients had subjective improvement of symptoms and quality of life, as evaluated by a visual analogue scale. The mean score was 8.2/10 (range 6-10). After an average of six months, symptoms occurred in 14 patients (87.5%): heartburn in 8 (57.1%), regurgitation in 7 (50%) and dysphagia in 6 (42.8%), all of them considered as mild. Six patients required additional therapy, one (6.25%) needed reoperation for recurrence of symptoms (severe dysphagia), and 5 (31%) received proton pump inhibitors. All patients experienced weight gain (mean 5.8 kg) Conclusion:Laparoscopic Heller myotomy is the treatment of choice for achalasia, with low morbidity and mortality. Despite the high rate of symptoms recurrence, patients perceived an improvement in their quality of life and gained weight. The results of our series compare favorably with other treatment options reported in the literature. Aims; Our aim of this study is to compare the short-term outcome of laparoscopic Heller-Toupet and Heller-Dor procedures for patients with achalasia from the symptomatic and functional points of view. Patients and Methods; Fifty-two patients with achalasia who complained dysphagia were enrolled into this study. All patients had laparoscopic Heller myotomy. The patients were divided into the following two groups according to the fundoplication type added to myotomy; Heller-Toupet group (HT, n = 30) and Heller-Dor group (HD, n = 22 Objective: Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is frequently associated with obesity (BMI > 30), being reported in up to 51% of patients. The optimal surgical procedure for the combined treatment of morbid obesity and GERD has yet to be defined. Roux-en-Y gastric bypass has had favorable results on GERD in the morbidly obese but has the disadvantage of potential long-term metabolic derangement. We describe a novel operation combining sleeve gastrectomy with Nissen fundoplication (SGN) for the treatment of GERD in the morbidly obese. Methods: We recruited 6 morbidly obese patients with GERD. We performed a standard laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication over a 56F bougie dilator. With the dilator in place, successive firings of a 60 mm Echelon? stapler were used to perform the gastrectomy preserving the antrum and the fundic wrap. We then introduced an endoscope to verify an intact fundoplication and unrestricted flow to the pylorus. Results: This procedure was successfully performed in all 6 patients. All but one patient was female, with a mean age of 57 years. Mean operative time was 186.1 minutes. Mean starting body mass index (BMI) was 37.8. After a follow-up time of 30 to 150 days, our patients had mean weight loss of 17.5 pounds and an average decrease in BMI of 3.1. There were no complications within the 30-day period. There was no recurrence of GERD symptoms subjectively reported. Conclusion: This operation can be successfully performed with no short-term morbidity. The SGN allows for maintenance of reflux control despite the restriction of the sleeve gastrectomy. Additionally, the trend toward long-term weight loss would favor superior reflux control. Furthermore, SGN preserves the option to convert to another bariatric procedure.  Introduction: Local resection with adequate margins has been an effective treatment for a gastrointestinal mesenchymal tumor (GIMT). However, the treatment strategy for a GIMT that is located close to the esophago-gastric junction (EGJ) remains controversial. We evaluate the surgical techniques and clinical outcomes of laparoscopic intragastric resection (LIR) for GIMT located close to the esophago-gastric junction. Methods: We performed laparoscopic intragastric resection of GIMT in 10 patients. There were 3 males and 7 females. Their ages ranged from 34 to 75 years, with a mean of 60 years. The tumor measured 1.0 to 6.5 cm in diameter, with a mean of 2.6 cm. One of them had two tumors simultaneously. The mean distance from tumor to esophagogastric junction was 2.6 cm (range: 1-3 cm). Their locations of the stomach were at the posterior wall side in 5 tumors, at the lesser curvature in 4, and at the greater curvature and anterior wall side in one, respectively. LIR was preformed by two or three working ports inserting to the stomach directly. Initially, the abdominal wall and the anterior wall of the stomach were fixed using a double straight needle device. Two or three trocars were inserted into the stomach via the left upper quadrant of the abdominal wall under oral endoscopic guidance. A partial resection of the stomach was performed using a linear stapler so as not to cause any deformity of the EGJ. This resection included the tumor with an adequate margin in all directions. The direction of the cut line was modified so that the EGJ remained clear. The resected specimen was retrieved orally using a plastic bag. The oral gastroscope was used to exclude stenosis at the EGJ. Results: Laparoscopic resection was successfully performed in all patients. The mean operation time was 164 min (range: 110-211 min), and a mean post-operative hospital stay was 8.3 days (range: 4-12 days). One patient had an anemia with unclear origin requiring blood transfusion. Histological diagnoses were GIST in 5 tumors, leiomyoma in 5 and cyst in one, respectively. There was no recurrence during the mean follow-up periods of 93.7 months (range: 7-115 months). Conclusion: Laparoscopic intragastric resection for GIMT is a safe and effective treatment with minimal complication and no recurrence. Background: Laparoscopy-assisted total gastrectomy (LATG) is not widely used for the treatment of gastric cancer located in the upper or middle third of the stomach. To assess the safety and usefulness of LATG, we compared the outcomes of LATG with those of open total gastrectomy (OTG). Methods: From July 2004 to July 2007, we performed pancreas-and spleen-preserving total gastrectomy with D1 + ?? or D2 lymph-node dissection and Roux-en-Y reconstruction in 74 patients with cancer located in the upper or middle third of the stomach. Of these patients, 30 underwent LATG (LATG group) and 44 underwent OTG (OTG group). Short-term outcomes were compared between the groups. Results: Operation time was significantly longer in the LATG group than in the OTG group (313 min vs. 218 min, P < 0.001). Blood loss (134 g vs. 407 g, P < 0.001) and the rate of the use of analgesics (6.8 times vs. 11.8 times, P < 0.05) were significantly lower, and the postoperative hospital stay was significantly shorter in the LATG group than in the OTG group (13.5 days vs. 18.2 days, P < 0.05). The LATG group had better hematologic and serum chemical profiles, including white-cell counts, C-reactive protein levels, total protein levels, and albumin levels, as well as a lower rate of postoperative body-weight loss. The number of dissected lymph nodes (43.2 vs. 51.2 p = 0.098) and the rate of postoperative complications (20.0% vs. 27.3%. P = 0.287) were similar in the groups. However, major complications such as anastomotic leakage, abdominal abscess, and pancreatic leakage occurred in 6 patients (13.6%) in the OTG group, but none of the patients in the LATG group. Conclusions: LATG is associated with less severe complications and a better postoperative quality of life than OTG. We believe that LATG is a safe, useful, and less invasive alternative for the treatment of gastric cancer located in the upper or middle third of the stomach. Introduction: Gastroesophagic reflux disease is present worldwide, it has a ratio of 360 in 100,000 persons, being the most common esophagic disease, accounting for 75% of cases One of the most common complications after antireflux surgery is the migration of the fundoplication into the mediastinum, leading to recurrent GERD symptoms. To prevent postoperative intrahoracic wrap herniation, some authors have advocated the closure of the hiatus and the use of prosthetic materials. Introduction: Laparoscopic Nissens fundoplication is the most common surgical procedure performed for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). It is however associated with a number of mechanical complications with as many as one in three patients experiencing troublesome dysphagia or gas bloat . Partial fundoplication, either posterior or anterior, has been advocated in an attempt to reduce these problems. Our aim was to prospectively evaluate laparoscopic posterior partial fundoplication (Toupet) as the primary surgical treatment for GERD. Method: A prospective review of outcomes following Toupet fundoplication from October 2002 to June 2008. All patients underwent a 270o posterior partial fundoplication with routine crural repair. All procedures were performed by a single surgeon. Pre-operative investigations included endoscopy, pH studies/manometry and contrast studies. Demeester acidity scores, % reflux time and oesophageal motility were recorded. Pre-and post-operative Demeester symptom scores (0-9, DSS) and Visick grading were used to assess outcomes of surgery. Results: 101 patients were studied. Ages ranged from 17 to 69 years. Median preoperative DSS of 5 fell to a median of 0 post-operatively. Scores decreased following surgery in all cases. 91 (91%) patients were discharged on the 2nd post-operative day or sooner. 5 (4.9%) patients had prolonged dysphagia (> 3 months), and 8 (7.9%) had mild prolonged gas bloat. A single patient had a recurrence of reflux and required re-do laparoscopic surgery at 2 years. There were no conversions to open surgery. Conclusions: Laparoscopic Toupet fundoplication provides excellent relief of GERD symptoms with a low incidence of postoperative mechanical complications. We would recommend it as the operation of choice for GORD. Introduction: There is still a debate how to treat early carcinoma of the esophago-gastric junction. The spectrum ranges from endoscopic procedures to esophageal or gastric resections. Less invasive but with appropiate radicality is the limited resesction as described here. Methods: 134 patients with early carcinomas of the esophago-gastric junction underwent a limited resection of the distal esophagus and esophago-gastric junction, and reconstruction by interposition of a pedicled isoperistaltic jejunal segment. The patients were analysed for extent and multicentricity of primary tumor, the pattern of lymphatic spread, complications, death and outcome of surgical treatment. Results: In more than 60% of the cases multicentric tumor growth could be found in the resection specimen. R0 resection could be achieved in all cases including the entire length of the metaplastic segment. In T1a tumors there were no lymph node metastases, in contrast to app. 20% lymph node metastases in T1b tumors. After a median follow-up of 60 months the Gastrointestinal Quality of Life Index did not differ from that of healthy controls. The lymph node status showed a prognostic impact wheras T1a or T1b did not. Conclusions: Limited resection of the esophago-gastric junction is a safe procedure which has its place within the spectrum of therapeutic option for early cancer of the esophago-gastric junction specifically for the subgroup of patients having tumor growth in the submucosal layer as well as local lymph node metastases. Objectives: The surgical treatment of achalasia remains controversial. Controversies include open vs. videoscopic approach, laparoscopic vs. thoracoscopic approach, and the need for an antireflux procedure. Laparoscopic Heller myotomy is hampered by the requirement of an added antireflux procedure. If the hiatus is not opened, thoracoscopic Heller myotomy does not require an antireflux procedure, but is associated with greater rates of residual achalasia. Robotics by virtue of 3-D visualization and greater maneuverability may facilitate thoracoscopic Heller myotomy. Methods: From 12/05 to 4/08, 14 patients underwent robot-assisted thoracoscopic esophageal myotomy for achalasia without an antireflux procedure. Diagnosis of achalasia was confirmed by radiography, endoscopy, and manometry. Patients underwent intraoperative EGD. Robot-assisted myotomy was accomplished through 4 ports in the left chest. Myotomy was extended approximately 1 cm onto the proximal stomach. Success of the myotomy was determined by intraoperative EGD, postoperative contrast radiography, subjective symptom questionnaire, and Viscik grading. Results: There were 4 men and 10 women. 8/14 (57%) patients had undergone botulinum toxin injection. There were no mucosal injuries or conversion to a thoracotomy. Median hospitalization was 4 days. All patients reported improvement in dysphagia. Symptom relief was graded as: 12 Viscik I, 2 Viscik II. 7/12 patients reported symptoms which mimicked reflux. Gastroesophageal reflux was seen in 1 patient. Conclusions: Robot-assistance facilitates thoracoscopic Heller myotomy. Although greater experience is needed, the preliminary results of this study suggest that robot-assisted thoracoscopic Heller myotomy without an antireflux procedure may represent an excellent alternative to laparoscopic myotomy with an antireflux procedure. Objectives: Ivor Lewis esophagogastrectomy is a well established oncologic procedure for cancers at or near the gastro-esophageal junction. However, this procedure is associated with significant morbidity related to the thoracotomy, especially following induction chemo/radiation therapy. A thoracoscopic approach may obviate this problem. Currently, thoracoscopic approaches are limited by 2-D visualization and lack of instrument maneuverability. Robotics, by virtue of 3-D visualization and greater dexterity may facilitate the thoracoscopic portion of the Ivor Lewis esophagogastrectomy. Methods: Between 1/04 and 10/08, 36 patients underwent robotic-assisted esophagectomy with intrathoracic esophagogastrostomy (27 men, 9 women, age 37-77). Robot-assisted thoracoscopic esophageal dissection, mediastinal nodal dissection and intrathoracic anastomosis were performed via 4 ports in the right chest. Results: 14 patients had induction therapy. Median operative time: 9 hours (range 8-17 hours). Esophagogastrostomy was performed in the right chest above the azygous vein. There were 8 nonemergent conversions to a thoracotomy due to technical difficulty with the anastomosis. Cell type were 27 ACA, 5 SCCA, 2 poorly differentiated CA, 1 carcinoma in situ, 1 high grade dysplasia. Median hospitalization was 11 days (range 8-60 days). Complications: 1 anastomotic leak (3%), 5 atrial fibrillation, 2 pulmonary emboli, 1 gastric staple line dehiscence > 30 days, 1 ileus, 1 respiratory failure, 1 reversible renal failure, 2 C-Diff colitis. There was one death (3%). Six patients (18%) required dilation of the esophagogastrostomy, 1 (3%) required pyloric dilatation. Follow up was complete in 34 patients (94%). At follow up, distant mets were seen in 6 (17%) patients, there was no local recurrence, and 22 (61%) were alive. Six patients died of their cancer (17%) and 5 died of other causes (17%). Conclusions: Robot assistance significantly facilitates the thoracoscopic mobilization of the esophagus during an Ivor Lewis esophagogastrectomy. Robotic intrathoracic anastomosis is feasible but remains a challenge. More studies and further follow up are necessary to fully assess the role of robotics in the minimally invasive treatment of esophageal cancer. Introduction:Surgical treatment is the best mean for curative therapy of gastric submocosal tumor (SMT) including GIST, however, the preferred operative approaches are still not well established. We would like to present our successful results of laparoscopic procedures according to the location and malignant potential of gastric SMT. Operative Techniques:Operative approach should be decided by the tumor size, location, and malignancy. Basically, laparoscopic wedge resection is performed for the most of gastric SMT as possible. On the other hand, if the tumor was located near esophago-gastric junction, proximal gastric resection is required for the malignant GIST while intra-gastric resection was selected for the low grade malignant or benign tumor. For the malignant GIST near pyloric ring, we selected pylorus preserving gastrectomy as possible or distal gastrectomy and if the tumor at the same lesion was low grade malignant or benign, laparoscopic wedge resection with preservation of the pyloric function is done. Patients:11 Patients underwent the laparoscopic resection of gastric SMT from Jan. 1, 2005 to Aug. 1, 2008. There were 7 GIST, 3 leiomyoma and 1 cyst. Result: Laparoscopic procedures were carried out for all patients such as 3 proximal resections, 1 pylorus preserved gastrectomy, 3 wedge resections, 3 intra-gastric resections and 1 partial resection with the intervention of flexible endoscopy. Each mean operative time was 238 min, 160 min, 76 min, 122 min and 119 min and the blood loss was 140 ml, 25 ml, 10 ml, 7 ml and 1 ml respectively. There were no episodes of tumor rupture or spillage and no major peri-operative complications without conversions to the open surgery. All patients had good postoperative courses as well. Conclusion:We thought that the selection of appropriate laparoscopic approach based on the location and malignant potential is very important for the treatment of gastric SMT to maximize the patient?s benefit. Francis E Rosato, Jr MD, Karen A Chojnacki MD, Ernest L Rosato MD, Bernadette C Profeta MD, David S Tichansky MD, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA Introduction: Laparoscopic excision of GIST tumors is safe and oncologically effective. GIST tumors at the gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) introduce special difficulties due to the complex accessibility of the proximal stomach by laparoscopy and concerns of narrowing the GEJ, while ensuring an oncologic resection. Herein, we examine the feasibility of laparoscopic transluminal excision (LTE) of GEJ GIST tumors to alleviate both of these problems. Methods: Patients identified with GIST tumors within 3 cm of the GEJ underwent LTE. Following laparoscopic exposure of the stomach, intraoperative endoscopy was used to confirm the location of the mass. A transverse gastrotomy was made in the body of the stomach and the GIST tumor directly visualized. A bougie was placed in the esophagus to ensure an oncologic resection was feasible without encroachment on the GEJ. A suture or endoloop was placed around the base of the GIST to retract the tumor and elevate the wall of the stomach at the base of the GIST. GIA staplers were used from within the stomach to fully excise the GIST. Introduction: Airway stents have gained increasing popularity in the management of challenging tracheobronchial obstruction based on the simplicity of their placement and the lack of good alternative approaches. Careful and judicious stent placement has provided significant and life-saving airway improvement in many patients. We present our experience with the use of the ultraflex stents in the management of airway complications in esophageal carcinoma and analyzed the relationships between survival after tracheobronchial stenting and clinical features. Patients and Methods:Twelve patients with esophageal carcinoma underwent placement of ultraflex stents for respiratory distress caused by tracheobronchial invasion. Mean age of the patients was 62.3 + 9.4 years (range 51-79 years), and there were 10 men and 2 women. All patients had histologically confirmed squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus. Tumor resection had been performed in 7 patients, curative surgical intervention in 4 and a palliative operation in 3. Tumor resection had not beenperformed in 5 patients, bypass surgery in 4 and chemo-radiation therapy in the remaining 1 patient. The sites of stenoses included the trachea in 7 patients, and left main bronchus in 5. The causes of the tracheobroncial stenoses involved primary tumor invasion in 4 patients, mediastinal lymph node invasion in 5, and mediastinal recurrence in 3. The ultraflex stent (Boston Scientific, Tokyo, Japan) was placed using flexible bronchoscopy under local anaesthesia and sedation. Results:Since careful and judicious stent placement has provided significant, complications of stent placement was nothing and all patients received chemotherapy after stents insertion. In 2 patients of tracheal stenoses, tracheal intubations carried out by the intensive care unit for complaints of severe respiratory stridor. Another 10 patients had respiratory distress and were admitted to the hospital. After stents insertion, immediate relief of respiratory symptoms was obtained in all patients. The mean survival after stent insertion was 105 + 71 days. Causes of death were re-obstruction in 2, airway bleeding in 2, and cancer progression in 8. Multivariate analysis in age, gender, treatment degree, tumor resection, the site of stenting and the cause of stenosis revealed that tumor resection and the site of the stenting were the significant and independent risk factor for the survival (P < 0.05). Conclusion: Stents setting can immediately improve patients? quality of life and tumor resection and the site of the stenting were the significant and independent risk factor for the survival. Despite the success rate of laparoscopic fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) at around 90%, the patients who need maintenance therapy of proton pump inhibitor or re-do surgery for recurrence of esophagitis post-operatively are recognized. The aim of this study was to analyze the characteristics of recurrence cases investigating our experienced patients. Methods: Two hundred and sixty-two consecutive patients underwent laparoscopic fundoplication for GERD in our institution between December 1994 and July 2008. Patients with strictly more than one year follow-up were chosen. Finally, 190 patients (113 men and 77 women, mean age was 53.8?}16.1; 18-85) remained and were divided into the following 2 groups: 19 patients (10%) with recurrence of esophagitis and 171 patients (90%) with non-recurrence of esophagitis. Their clinical data collected in a prospectively fashion was retrospectively reviewed. The patients? background, pre-operative condition, surgical results, and post-operative conditions were compared between the two groups. Results: Recurrence group was significantly older than non-recurrence group (60.4, 53.1 years old, p = 0.04), however, there were no significant differences in gender ratio, BMI, and disease length (p = 0.05. 0.37, and 0.18, respectively). According to the anatomy-functional-pathology (AFP) classification, the degree and type of hiatal hernia (A factor) and the degree of esophagitis (P factor) were significantly worse in recurrence group (p = 0.0001 and 0.03, respectively) but the degree of reflux (F factor) wasn?t a statistical difference (p = 0.32). There were no significant differences in blood loss and peri-operative complications (p = 0.75 and 0.92, respectively). As to post-operative condition, the degree of hiatal hernia, esophagitis and reflux were significantly aggravated in recurrence group (p < 0.0001, each). Conclusion: 1) Golden-ager was the risk factor of recurrence of reflux esophagitis. 2) If the patient has deteriorated esophagitis and hiatal hernia pre-operatively, the risk of recurrence was increased but the degree of reflux didn?t correlate. 3) The patients in recurrence group had a recurrent hiatal hernia and the degree of esophagitis and reflux were significantly aggravated. CJ Magee MD, R Macadam PhD, M Shrotri MD, D Kerrigan MD, Taylor W, University Hospital AIntree, UK Objectives: The current UICC staging system for gastric cancer relies on number of positive nodes to give N stage, up to a maximum of 16 involved nodes. As most nodal harvesting is based on macroscopically detected nodes there is a real danger that involved nodes may be missed and therefore the disease is understaged. We hypothesised that fat processing and microscopic evaluation of gastrectomy specimens would improve nodal yield, detection of nodal metastases and therefore staging of the disease Methods: 121 consecutive gastrectomy specimens were histologically examined by a consultant gastrointestinal pathologist. All macroscopically enlarged nodes were analysed. In addition fat was processed and microscopic lymph nodes analysed. Results: Median macroscopic nodal yield was 20 (0-58), fat processing increased this to 43 (1-76, p < 0.0001). In 58% of cases no additional metastases were identified. In 42% of cases fat processing revealed metastatic lymph nodes. In 15% cases the additional positive nodes identified changed the N stage-(N0-> N1 4 cases, 3.2%, N1-> N2 8 cases, 6.5%, N2-> N3 5 cases, 4% and N1-> N3 in one case 0.8%). Macroscopic nodal harvesting understages true nodal status for N0, N1 and N2 in 10%, 20% and 25% respectively. Conclusions: Fat processing for microscopic lymph node analysis improves staging in 15% of cases. This has significant implications for prognosis and possible adjuvant therapy. Further work is being undertaken to improve selection of cases for fat processing. Background: Laparoscopic nissen fundoplication (LNF) is the gold standard for surgical treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) with majority of patients are younger adults. In recent era of aging population, many community surgeons are hesitant to perform this procedure in the elderly due to presumed higher morbidity and poorer surgical outcomes. Therefore this study is aimed to investigate long term subjective and objective outcomes of LNF based on age. groups were able to discontinue their H2 blocker, proton pump inhibitor and antacid postoperatively. Objective measurement with pre and postoperative EGD showed highest percentage of resolution of hiatal hernia in patients > 65 compared to those in younger age groups (85% vs 55%-group A, 56%-groupB, 44%-group C; p = 0.28). The most significant improvement of esophagitis was endoscopically seen in the youngest age group and at a lower frequency as the age increases (38%-group A vs 34%-groupB, 23%-group C, 12% group D; p = 0.035). UGI that was performed pre and postoperatively trended toward similar results. Length of hospital stay was similar among all groups (1.1 day; p = 0.980). Reoperation was required in 4 patients in group B (4/98), 4 in group C (4/131) and 1 in group D (1/37). No mortality found in this series. Conclusions: Laparoscopic nissen fundoplication provides a comparable subjective and objective outcomes in the elderly patients to those in younger age. The more frequent anatomic and physiologic esophageal abnormalities found in the elderly patients do not preclude good surgical outcomes. Illegal drug transport is sometimes done by individuals carrying the drug into their body. ''Body Packer'' is the term normally used to refere them. Intoxication and bowel obstruction are the main medical problems that may develop. If needed, laparotomy can be performed to remove the drug pack from the body. A wide range of papers have been published reporting that, but little laparoscopic experience has been communicated. We present a case of gastric cocaine pack of 8 cm in a young male patient. The pack was unable to pass the pylorus in 3 weeks. In our case, successful surgery was performed by laparoscopic approach. A gastrostomy was done, and the cocaine pack removed from the stomach and from the body trough the umbilical port inside a plastic bag. The postoperative period was uneventful and patient benefit from the advantages of this minimally invasive approach. Fran Keating BS, John ODea PhD, Crospon, Galway, Ireland Objective: Impedance Planimery has been demonstrated as a useful technique for assessing the cross sectional area of hollow lumens in the gastrointestinal tract. EndoFLIP? represents the first commercial implementation of this technique, and provides cross sectional area/diameter measurements at mutiple points along the tract simultaneously. This study presents the first accuracy evaluation of the EndoFLIP? system and measurement catheter Methods: The EndoFLIP? balloon catheters used for this study allow 16 diameter measurements spaced 3 mm apart along the axis of the catheter to be measured at the one time and in real time. The initial prototype balloons are specified for diameter measurements up to 25 mm, the upper diameter being chosen to suit measurements made in the gastroesophageal junction for assessment of distensibility of the junction, or for assessment of GEJ diameter pre-,post-or during GERD surgery. Bench testing was carried out using calibrated rigid cylinders with the following diameters (mm) : 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 26 BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal stenting is most often utilized for end-stage palliation for unresectable malignancy. We propose the concept of gastrointestinal (non-biliary) stenting as a bridge to surgery for benign conditions, as well as, neoadjuvant stenting for malignant diseases. METHOD: All stents were placed in the operating room under general anesthesia, with endoscopic and fluoroscopic techniques. All foregut stents were placed for nutritional repletion in place of parenteral or percutaneous enteral feeding. Colonic stents were placed for strictures or colonic cancer to relieve obstruction. RESULTS: Over 60 enteral stents were placed during a 7 year period, mostly for esophageal cancer palliation. In 13 patients, enteral stents were placed with the intention of performing a subsequent operation; 9 patients had esophageal stenting (5 removable polyester, 4 covered metallic, 4 stents for benign disease), 1 duodenal metallic, and 3 colonic metallic stents. There were no perforations, no aspiration events. All colonic stents underwent resection without colostomy. The patient with duodenal stent was not resectable secondary to metastasis. Three polyester esophageal stents had migration, and were replaced. All esophageal stenting patients underwent successful surgery. CONCLUSIONS: Gastrointestinal stenting is an acceptable strategy as a bridge to planned surgery. Colonic stenting for obstruction may obviate the need for colostomies. Gastroesophageal stenting enhances nutrition during neoadjuvant treatment periods, reducing the need for enteral feeding tubes or parenteral nutrition. The benefits for duodenal stenting in preparation for future surgery are less clear. This is also the first report of temporary gastroesophageal stents placed for benign conditions prior to definitive surgical treatment. Introduction: Based on studies from specialized centers, laparoscopic paraesophageal hernia (PEH) repair has proven to be a safe and effective procedure. We hypothesized that during the past decade, both the total number of PEH repairs and the proportion approached laparoscopically have increased. The aim of this population based study was to examine the evolution of national practice patterns for the management of PEH (Table) . Premyotomy angulation of the distal esophagus impacted symptoms before myotomy but not after myotomy (Table) . Discussion: Premyotomy angulation of the distal esophagus correlates with preoperative symptom severity. After myotomy and fundoplication, symptomatic relief of achalasia is dramatic; symptomatic relief is not impacted by premyotomy esophageal angulation. Notable angulation of the distal esophagus should not deter application of myotomy and fundoplication. There were no mortalities and intra-operative morbidity rate was 5.7%. All revisional operations had at least a fundoplication performed. Of patients undergoing primary operations, 86 underwent a fundoplication, 28 of them also had the hiatus reinforced with a prosthetic mesh. Of the remaining 18 patients without fundoplication, 12 had mesh repairs. All patients underwent anterior gastropexy. Esophagram performed prior to discharge showed no immediate recurrence and 3 esophageal perforations. Follow-up esophagrams were obtained in 63% of patients at an average of 12 of months post-operatively. Only 10 recurrences were documented, all of which were discovered after 12 months. No recurrences were seen at the 6 month esophagrams. Of these radiographic recurrences, 6 were symptomatic. Of the recurrences 2 occurred after revisional procedures. Analysis of intra-operative strategies including mesh reinforcement, sac excision, gastropexy or fundoplication did not predict recurrences. None of the patients with recurrences underwent further surgical intervention. Conclusions: Analysis did not determine which operative strategies lead to our overall decreased recurrence rate. Recurrences on esophagram were not seen on the immediate post-operative period and remained asymptomatic in some. Introduction: An epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum is a consequence of severe long-standing achalasia and can further exacerbate the symptoms of achalasia. This study was undertaken to determine the operative complications and long-term outcomes after laparoscopic diverticulectomy, Heller myotomy, and anterior fundoplication for achalasia complicated by epiphrenic diverticulum. Methods: Of 440 laparoscopic Heller myotomies, 25 patients have undergone laparoscopic diverticulectomy, Heller myotomy, and anterior fundoplication. Before and after operative intervention, patients scored the frequency/severity of symptoms utilizing a Likert scale (0 = never/not bothersome to 10 = always/very bothersome). Data are reported as median (mean +/)SD). Results: Patient age was 73 years (68 years +/) 13.6); 52% of patients were male. Duration of preoperative symptoms was 5 years (7 years +/) 6.0). Preoperative dysphagia and regurgitation were particularly frequent and severe. After laparoscopic diverticulectomy, Heller myotomy, and anterior fundoplication, 14 patients experienced pleural effusion (5), capnothorax (4), gastrotomy (2), occult contrast extravasation at the staple line (2), and pneumonia (2). Length of stay was 2 days (4 days +/) 3.8). Follow-up is 35 months (37 months +/) 29.3). At last followup, dysphagia, choking, chest pain, vomiting and regurgitation had significant improved (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon); symptoms were not notable in frequency or severity after diverticulectomy. Diverticula recurred in 3 (12%) patients. 2 patients (8%) are dissatisfied because of recurrent or persistent dysphagia; though for each, myotomy is adequate. Conclusions: Epiphrenic diverticula occur in older patients with very symptomatic long-standing achalasia. Although concomitant diverticulectomy adds morbidity to laparoscopic Heller myotomy and anterior fundoplication, patients experience salutary relief from symptoms of achalasia. Diverticula can recur, therefore, we now cover the staple line with an anterior fundoplication. Laparoscopic diverticulectomy, Heller myotomy, and anterior fundoplication are encouraged for patients with esophageal diverticula and severe symptomatic achalasia. Acute gastric volvulus secondary to paraesophageal hiatal hernia can be a lifethreatening condition, causing gastric necrosis, perforation and sepsis. Emergency surgery with total or partial proximal gastrectomy, obligates the patient to a second challenging procedure to re-establish gastrointestinal continuity. Laparoscopic esophagojejunostomy is a technically demanding procedure; this is especially true when the procedure is the second stage for reconstruction following an emergency total gastrectomy for gastric necrosis and perforation. We present two cases of paraesophageal hiatal hernia, with intrathoracic, upsidedown stomach and extensive gastric necrosis. Both patients were successfully treated with gastrectomy (one total and the other proximal subtotal), distal esophageal stapling, placement of a feeding jejonostomy and endoscopic, ultrasound-guided cervical esophagostomy. Gastrointestinal continuity was reconstituted a few months later, with laparoscopic esophagojejunostomy. For the laparoscopic reconstruction, the mean estimated blood loss was 1075 ml, the mean operation time was ten hours and 49 minutes, and mean length of stay was nine and half days. * Case 1 suffered from coronary artery disease and was on Aspirin and Plavix. We present these two cases with the technical details of the procedure and a review of the literature. Older patients did not require more postoperative dilatations or revisional surgery for recurrent or persistent symptoms (7 vs. 8 patients, p = 0.48). Satisfaction scores did not differ between the two groups, and > 90% of patients in both groups reported they would undergo the procedure again. Conclusions: Old age is not a contraindication for esophagomyotomy and Dor fundoplication in patients with achalasia. The elderly benefit just as much as younger patients. Introduction: Anastomotic complications are frequently encountered in the setting of esophagectomy, with leak rates ranging from 10-20%. Complete necrosis of the gastric tip is a rare complication that can be associated with significant morbidity and impairment of quality of life. In the current study, we evaluated the perioperative outcomes of patients who developed gastric tip necrosis following esophagectomy to review contemporary management strategies and to elucidate the impact of this complication on length of stay, morbidity and mortality. Methods and Procedures: We retrospectively analyzed the clinical course of 823 esophagectomies performed at the University of Pittsburgh from 2001-2008. Patients with confirmed anastomotic leaks (radiographic or clinical) were identified. Gastric tip necrosis was defined as devitalization of greater than 50% of the esophagogastric anastomosis, with obvious necrosis of at least 1 cm of gastric tissue distal to the anastomosis. Primary endpoints included surgical management strategy, length of stay, complications and mortality. Statistical comparisons were performed with the t-test and Fisher?s exact test. Results: Gastric tip necrosis was encountered in 14 (1.7%) patients. Median age was 65 (35-80). Only 2/14 (14.3%) patients received neo-adjuvant therapy. Operative approaches included transhiatal (n = 6), totally minimally invasive (n = 6) and retrosternal (n = 2). Among those patients with anastomotic leaks, gastric tip necrosis occurred much more commonly with neck anastomoses (n = 13, 2.7%) compared with those in the chest (n = 1, 0.3%; p = 0.032) [Table] . Eleven patients underwent operative intervention (anastomotic takedown in 5; wide drainage ± flap in 6). The remaining three patients were treated with opening of the wound, packing, antibiotics and TPN or enteral feeds. Associated morbidity was encountered in 8 (57.1%) of patients. There was one death (7.1%). Gastric tip necrosis was associated with longer length of stay compared to those with a leak only (median: 38 vs. 19 days, p = 0.17). The majority of patients (71.4%) were discharged with a drain. Strictures were common (n = 10, 71.4%) following reconstruction or healing (median number of dilations = 3; range: 0-26). Conclusions: Gastric tip necrosis occurs most commonly in the neck, likely secondary to greater gastric wall tension and an attenuated blood supply relative to intrathoracic anastomoses. It is a highly morbid complication associated with a prolonged hospital course. Quality of life is impacted adversely by the need for long-term drains and repeated dilations. Delay in instituting adjuvant therapy may further compromise outcomes. Aggressive surgical intervention to resect devitalized tissue and establish wide drainage remains the hallmark of care, and will salvage the significant majority of patients. 7-30 days) . The median number of examined LN was higher in the MIE group, median = 10 (range 7 -13) compared to 5.5 (range 3 -17), although this was not significant (p = 0.087). The complication rate was the same in both groups (30%), and included one anastomotic leak in each group. Conclusion: Our initial experience with minimally invasive esophagectomy indicates that it can be performed safely with significantly less blood loss, a shorter hospital stay, and similar oncologic efficacy. There was an increase in the operative time with MIE; however, we predict this will decrease as we gain more experience with this technique. Results: Of all the surgeons, 30% use peritoneal cytology for staging of oesophago-gastric cancers. On asking the cause for not using peritoneal cytology, 52% reported low yield as the cause and only 4% believed that it is not a strong predictor of survival. On the contrary, 85% of the surgeons using peritoneal cytology said that they would consider no surgery or palliative surgery if it was positive. Forty-five percent surgeons agreed that peritoneal cytology improves staging accuracy and is a good prognostic marker. Conclusion The study clearly demonstrates that there is a wide variation in the use of peritoneal cytology as a staging modality. Although a limited number of surgeons routinely use peritoneal cytology, it is evident that it has a major impact on the management of these patients. Further research is needed to define its role in Upper GI cancer management. Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes have revolutionized patient care. The procedure has relatively few complications and can provide an incredible benefit for patients. However, complications may arise and cause severe morbidity and sometimes mortality. We present a case of a 39 year old male who came to our institute after suffering severe head trauma from an assault. The patient required a craniectomy to treat his condition and had significant cognitive dysfunction placing at risk his nutritional status. A PEG tube was placed and the patient was steadily improving. Four weeks after the procedure the patient developed severe abdominal distension and pain. CT scan revealed the PEG tube was located in the subcutaneous tissues and a large amount of fluid in the abdomen. The patient was taken to the OR and underwent a diagnostic laparoscopy. At that time it was noted that the PEG had become dislodged and tube feeds were being placed into the peritoneal cavity. Subsequently a laparoscopic abdominal wash out was done and replacement of the PEG under direct visualization. The use of minimally invasive techniques can be applied to all aspects of surgical practice for the improvement of patients? outcomes. These approaches decrease morbidity of the patient and allow for better outcomes. Introduction: Inflammatory Myoglandular Polyps (IMP?s) are poorly characterized and extremely rare. They present most frequently in the left colon, and may produce symptoms related to this location. We present a case of IMP located in the right colon, associated with rectal symptoms, and offer a review of the available medical literature. CASE REPORT: A 35 year old female was referred for the evaluation of intermittent rectodynia, tenesmus, and occasional hematochezia. The patient stated her condition had been present for at least 2 years. Routine physical examination and anoscopy in the office failed to show any anomalies and she was scheduled for outpatient colonoscopy. During the procedure a large pedunculated polyp was located and removed from the hepatic flexure. Pathological examination showed features consistant with a IMP. The patient reported complete resolution of her rectodynia and as of 1 year of follow up she remains asymptomatic. Discussion: As of September 2008 only 60 cases of IMP have been described in the available medical literature. The etiology of the polyp is unclear, and the overwhelming majority of the reports concern left colon and upper rectum lesions. Accordingly this is the first description of a right sided IMP associated with tenesmus and rectodynia. A review of the current knowledge of this unusual diagnosis is offered. The successful procedure was performed by Drs. McCune, Shorb, and Moscovitz and was predicated on hours of canine research followed by patience and determination in the operating room. Their research began in the late 1950?s on imaging techniques of the pancreatic duct. Their initial attempts included a variety of modalities to visualize the pancreatic parenchyma in order to diagnose pancreatic disease including carcinomas. At the time, it was rare to actually diagnose and treat pancreatic carcinoma successfully. Initial efforts included angiography through lumbar tributaries which was successful in a canine model but was not clinically applicable. Ultimately, the group developed a method to visualize the pancreatic duct through endoscopic guidance. Unfortunately, the ideal endoscopic instrument did not exist until it was developed by the Eder Instrument Company. Long thought lost, the original Eder Fiberduodenoscope was recently donated to the George Washington University Department of Surgery by Dr. Shorb. The Eder fiberduodenoscope was specifically designed with a proximal light source, a flexible tip, and a forward and side viewing lens. A small tract was attached to the posterior aspect of the endoscope for a cannula and an endotracheal cuff balloon was placed on the distal aspect of the scope proximal to the lens. With the cuff inflated, the tip of the scope would disengage from the mucosa and allow the lens to identify the ampulla. ERCP was performed on patients after completing an open cholecystectomy for symptomatic cholelithiasis. The scope was guided past the pylorus manually. With time, patience, and luck, a tangential view of the ampulla was obtained. Once the ampulla of Vater was located, the cannula was passed through the scope. Then the entire scope was advanced distally several centimeters so the side thrusting cannula port was parallel with the ampulla. Subsequently, the cannula was inserted blindly, since the ampulla was not visualized directly. Despite these technical difficulties, the pancreatic ductal anatomy was identified in many patients. Currently less than 1% of surgeons perform ERCP, however the ramifications of this evolution are salient today with regards to the current developments regarding endoluminal treatments. Much like Drs. McCune, Shorb and Moscowitz, many surgeons are familiar with the patience and persistence required to develop new instruments and techniques. The success of these GW surgeons should encourage future surgeons to continue to develop and refine endoluminal therapies. Background: Gastric bypass results in significant weight loss in the morbidly obese population. There is however, an incidence of weight regain associated with the procedure. One theory for the weight regain is pouch dilation. StomaphyX is a device which addresses pouch dilation by endoscopically plicating the gastric pouch, resulting in a decreased pouch size. This study represents our initial 6 month data of the effect of the StomaphyX gastric pouch plication on weight regain after gastric bypass. Methods: A retrospective review of a prospectively maintained database was performed. Six patients who had previously undergone gastric bypass surgery and suffered weight regain after an initial period of weight loss underwent endoscopic tissue fusion or plication of the gastric pouch using the StomaphyX device. All patients maintained a liquid diet for 2 weeks prior to and after the procedure. The procedure was completed by an experienced endoscopist and bariatric surgeon. A proctor was present for every case. Patients were followed for 6 months. Data points included average weight loss after bypass, weight regain, and weight loss after gastric pouch plication. Subjective endpoint was a change in degree of restriction. Results: Six patients status post gastric bypass successfully underwent endoscopic pouch plication. Average initial weight loss after bypass surgery was 131lbs (range 111-190 lbs). Weight regain averaged 52 lbs (38.9 -86 lbs). The average gastric pouch was decreased from 40 ml to 10 ml. There were no complications, and 5 of 6 patients reported no change in restriction. One patient confirmed restriction. Average weight loss was found to be 8.9 lbs (range: gain of 9lbs to loss of 24.9lbs). Percent of excess weight loss averaged 27% (range: gain of 14% to loss of 84%). Two patients gained weight (9lbs, 4lbs). One patient lost 24.9 lbs, but this patient?s course was complicated by a partial small bowel obstruction months after the StomaphyX procedure requiring lysis of adhesions. Conclusions: Based on this data, endoscopic plication of the gastric pouch resulted in an average of 27% excess body weight loss over 6 months. This data, however, could be influenced by the liquid diet that was maintained peri-operatively. One patient achieved greater weight loss than the others. This could be attributed to decreased intake surrounding her lysis of adhesions, thus skewing the data to reflect a greater weight loss. Our sample size is small, thus further studies with longer follow-up are necessary to evaluate the efficacy of this procedure in increasing weight loss. Objective: Anastomotic stricture presenting with dysphagia after transhiatal esophagectomy is a common problem. We have reviewed our experience with esophageal dilatations after transhiatal esophagectomies. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of all patients who underwent esophageal dilatation after transhiatal esophagectomies. Demographic data, number and methods of dilatations, time between dilatations, and time between surgery and first dilatation were collected. Results: There were 99 dilatations performed on 16 patients by a single surgeon between 3/1/2006 and 9/1/2008 (average of 6.2 dilatations per patient, range 1-19). All dilatations were performed using either the balloon dilator or the Savary-Gilliard bougies (55% and 45% of the time respectively). There were no reported complications. The average time between surgery and first dilatation was 65.3 days (range 22-281 days). The average time between dilatations was 32.8 days (range 6-215 days). Conclusion: Anastomotic strictures present early after transhiatal esophagectomy. Multiple repeated dilatations are needed to alleviate recurrent symptoms of dysphagia. When done properly, dilations of the esophageal-gastric anastomoses can be performed with low morbidity and mortality. Objective: Classic laparoscopic surgery is based on the ability to triangulate instrumentation to have good exposure and working space. This is done with multiple trans-abdominal ports. Decreasing the number of ports may be beneficial in decreasing pain. In addition elimination of port sites eliminates the risk of herniation at those sites and provides a definite cosmetic benefit. The visualization platform is evolving as our clinical experience broadens. A challenge of visualization with a rigid laparoscope in a single incision operation is collisions between the instrumentation, the camera head and the light cord. This makes triangulation and steady visualization difficult. To eliminate these collisions and stabilize the visualization platform we have adoped the use of a sterile high definition endoscope as our imaging modality of choice. Methods: 3 patients have had single incision surgery using the endoscope as a visualization platform. The patients were 3 females with 2 adjustable gastric bands placed, and 1 cholecystectomy. There were no complications. Patients went home the day of the operation. All were seen in clinic for 1 week postoperative follow up. Results: All patients had successful operations using the single incision technique. None had to be converted to standard laparoscopic technique. Use of the flexible endoscope in place of a rigid endoscope allowed for better visualization, movement of instruments in the ports and ease of surgery. Conclusions: Decreasing the amount of incisions decreases patient pain, risk of port site herniation and gives improved cosmesis. The evolution of visualization from a laparoscope to a flexible endoscope has allowed for increased operating ease for the surgeon by moving the scope out of the close proximity of the surgical instruments. The visualization is also better as the flexibility of the scope allows for superior triangulation. Lastly, the endoscope has the obvious advantage of self cleaning, leading to better image quality and decreased operating time. Thus, we believe that using an flexible endoscope rather than a rigid scope will prove to be a superior in single incision surgery. Objective: Gastrostomy tube (GT) placement after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass can be challenging. Novel, minimally invasive approaches are needed to access the gastric remnant in these patients. Our objective is to present an innovative method of endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided GT placement. Procedure Description: A 55 year-old morbidly obese female underwent reoperative, open retrocolic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and subsequently developed chronic nausea and failure to thrive. We opted to place a GT for gastric decompression and enteral nutrition; however, the gastric remnant was collapsed and not readily accessible percutaneously and a laparoscopic approach was unreasonable due to dense adhesions. We combined EUS and fluoroscopy to access the gastric remnant, and performed this procedure under general anesthesia. Procedural steps: (1) EUS identification of gastric remnant: We introduced a EUS scope into the proximal Roux limb, and ultrasonographically identified the posterior wall of the gastric remnant. (2) EUS-guided gastric remnant cannulation: We inserted a 19-gauge biopsy needle through the EUS scope and ultrasonographically guided it across the intestinal wall, into the gastric lumen. (3) Fluoroscopic confirmation of gastric cannulation: We injected radiopaque contrast material through the biopsy needle to confirm placement in the remnant. (4) Gastric remnant insufflation: We insufflated the gastric remnant through the biopsy needle to approximate it to the anterior abdominal wall. (5) Fluoroscopcally guided percutaneous GT placement: We placed a 12 French GT using Seldinger technique. The patient had an uneventful recovery from this procedure. Conclusion: We describe a safe, novel, and minimally invasive technique for placement of a GT into the bypassed gastric remnant. To our knowledge, this is the first report of successful EUS-guided GT placement, which has the potential to significantly impact the management of patients following gastric bypass. Less was known regarding outcome of dilatation in corrosive stricture of the esophagus. The aim of this study was to report the treatment outcome of dilatation for corrosive esophageal stricture. Methods: Medical records of twenty-three patients with corrosive esophageal stricture who underwent esophagal dilatations were reviewed. All dilatations were performed under general anesthesia using Savary-Gillard dilator with fluoroscopy. Outcome of the treatment was analysed. Results: One patients had esophageal perforation and underwent succesful surgical treatment. This patient had dilatation 4 weeks after corrosive ingestion. The other 22 patients had mulitiple dilatations without complication. All patients had good swallow function. Median dysphagia score was 1 after dilatation. Median number of dilatations was 6. Three out of 22 patients had more than 20 dilatations per year. Patients who needed frequent dilatation, long stricture and had laryngeal injury trend to have worse outcome. Conclusion: Esophageal dilatation is safe and effective for the treatment of corrosive esophageal stricture. Forceful dilatation should be avoided within one month of ingestion. Introduction: A minimally invasive method for accessing the gastric remnant to intervene on the biliary and pancreatic system after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) has not been well described. This is a retrospective review describing two surgeons? complete experience with laparoscopic trans-gastric (LaTG) ERCP for biliary and pancreatic duct management. Methods and Procedures: Twelve patients underwent LaTG-ERCP. Indications included choledocholithiasis (5 patients), ampullary stenosis / sphincter of Oddi dysfunction (5 patients), and abdominal pain with dilated biliary system (2 patients). All procedures were completed in the operating room under general anesthesia. Laparoscopy included identification of the gastric remnant and placement of a laparoscopic trocar directly into the gastric remnant under visualization. A side-viewing endoscope was passed through the trocar into the gastric remnant and advanced through the pylorus to access the major papilla. Endoscopic therapy including biliary and pancreatic sphincterotomy, stone removal, and tissue sampling was then conducted. After endoscopic therapy, the gastrostomy was either closed or a gastrostomy tube was placed for potential future therapy. Results: Laparoscopic assisted transgastric access was successful in all 12 patients. Nine patients proceeded directly to LaTG-ERCP, one failed prior laparoscopic CBD exploration, and two failed peroral attempts at ERCP. Endoscopic therapy was successful in all 12 patients. Complete biliary stone removal was successful in five patients. Patients with sphincter dysfunction or dilated biliary or pancreatic ducts had sphincterotomy in 6 cases and stent placement in one. Six patients that had intervention for biliary disease underwent follow-up imaging; five showed no residual stones and one had ductal dilation. All patients with abnormal lab values (LFTs, Amylase, or Lipase) pre LaTG-ERCP showed normalization post-procedure. Improvement in pain was seen in all patients at their first post operative visit. Complications included one patient with melena and one with wound infection. None had biliary or pancreatic complications. Conclusions: After gastric bypass, laparoscopic trans-gastric access of the remnant stomach for biliary and pancreatic ductal manipulation is feasible, safe, and effective. Introduction: Positron Emission Tomography/Computed Tomography (PET/ CT) performed in the staging and follow-up of patients with non-GI malignancies will occasionally detect a second primary tumor in the GI tract. The purpose of this study was to determine the ability of PET/CT to predict the presence of occult colorectal malignancy in patients already diagnosed with a non-GI cancer. Methods: A query of our IRB approved prospective Nuclear Medicine database was made and merged with a clinical chart review. All PET/CT were read by a board certified Nuclear Medicine Radiologist and all chart reviews were performed by trained clinicians. Results: Between 1/1/2005 and 7/29/2008, 3259 PET/CT were performed on 1923 patients at our institution to evaluate non-GI malignancies. Of the 1923 patients, 40 (1.8%) had findings concerning for an additional colorectal malignancy. Invasive work up was not pursued in 27 patients (68%) secondary to either advanced disease or a plan of close clinical follow up. Colonoscopy was performed on 13 (32%) of these patients revealing: colorectal cancer in 3 (23%), benign adenoma in 6 (46%), no discernable lesions in 2 (15%), hyperplastic polyp in 1 (8%), and inflammatory reaction from chewing gum impacted in the cecum in 1 (8%). Of the 3 patients with a colorectal second primary, 2 patients were found to have disseminated disease upon further staging. The remaining patient had stage I disease and underwent a potentially curative resection. The median age of the patients undergoing colonoscopy was 68 years (range: 52-77) and 10 of these patients never had a prior colonoscopy. The positive predictive value of PET/CT to identify a second primary colorectal malignancy in patients with a non-GI primary cancer was 23%. PET/CT characteristics that correlated with benign and malignant findings were a median of 5.5 SUV (range: 4-12 SUV) and 15 SUV (range: 14-53 SUV) respectively. Conclusions: In our database, the positive predictive value of PET/CT scans concerning for colorectal cancer in patients with non-GI tract malignancies is low. It is known that PET/CT scans may be positive in both benign and malignant colorectal tumors and inflammatory lesions, confirmed in our study. Positive colorectal findings on PET/CT should be investigated with colonoscopy. Objective: In this study, we report the incidence, common etiologies, endoscopic and pathologic findings and clinical outcomes of patients with esophageal ulcers (EU) in our urban population over a seventeen year period. Methods: This is a retrospective chart review of all upper endoscopies (EGD) performed by a single surgical endoscopist at an urban emergency hospital from January 1991 to December 2007. For all patients diagnosed with esophageal ulcer, a thorough review of the paper and electronic medical records was carried out. Results: Out of 12,563 EGD?s performed during the study period, there were 198 esophageal ulcers diagnosed (incidence of 1.6 %). The incidence increased from 0.1 % in 1991 to 3.3 % in 2007. The most common etiology was gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD, 126 cases), followed by medications (drug-induced, 34 cases.) Other causes included candida (7 cases), foreign body (7), ingestion of a caustic substance (5), post-gastrectomy (4), AIDS-related (4), herpes simplex virus (1) and esophageal diverticulosis (1) while nine had no clear etiology. The most common presenting complaints were nausea and vomiting, epigastric pain, and hematemesis (89, 71, and 70 cases, respectively). Thirteen patients had multiple episodes of EU. There were 21 deaths; however five of those patients who died had multiple episodes of EU prior to death (mortality rate 11.2 %.) Most of those patients who died were either chronically bedridden or critically ill. Conclusions: Esophageal ulcer is a rare cause of upper gastrointestinal symptoms. GERD and drug-induced ulcer are the most common etiologies. Both the incidence and mortality of EU have increased over the study period. In debilitated patients, this diagnosis coincides with a poor prognosis and may serve as a marker for the severity of underlying disease. Introduction: Although rare, some pediatric diseases may require diagnostic and therapeutic endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). The choice of duodenoscope for pediatric ERCP is not well studied. This study investigated the hypothesis that a therapeutic adult duoenoscope can be utilized safely for pediatric ERCP. Methods: All patients under the age of 18 were included in this study. The charts and operative reports of all patients who underwent ERCP were retrospectively reviewed. Collected data included type of endoscope utilized, ability to advance endoscope into esophagus and the duodenum, and complications related to endoscope size. Results: There were 18 patients who underwent ERCP between January 1st, 2006 to September 1st, 2008. The mean patient age was 11.3 years old (range 1.5 -17; median 13). A therapeutic adult side-viewing duodenoscope (tip diameter of 13 mm) was utilized successfully 95% of the time. The youngest patient with successful duodenal intubation using the adult duodenoscope was 17 months old. The pediatric endoscope (tip diameter of 7 mm) was necessary only in one patient (0.06%) who was a 17 months old child with anomalous lower esophageal sphincter that could not be negotiated using the adult duodenoscope. Upper esophageal intubation and duodenal intubation were successful in 100% and 95% of the cases respectively. There were no complications related to use or size of the endoscope. Conclusions: Adult sized therapeutic duodenoscopes can be safely utilized for ERCP in patients as young as 17 months. Endoscopists should preferably use adult sized duodenoscope since the pediatric sized duodenoscopes may limit the intended diagnostic and therapeutic interventions. is an invasive, but sensitive means of diagnosing and treating biliary disease. Complications range from 5-10%. The most common complications of ERCP are acute pancreatitis and duodenal perforation; but esophageal, splenic and hepatic injury have been reported. Here we report such a splenic injury after ERCP. CASE REPORT: A 29 year old female was referred for diagnostic ERCP for recurrent biliary colic and elevated liver function test. The scope was passed easily and the biliary duct cannulated in the first attempt. The cholangiogram showed choledocolithiasis, and a therapeutic sphincterotomy and lithotomy was performed. Post procedure the patient developed abdominal pain that resolved without intervention. The diagnostic work up was suggestive of post-procedure pancreatitis. The patient received a laparoscopic cholecystectomy upon resolution, the findings included a grade I splenic laceration without active bleeding. DISCUSSION: Although rare, several cases of ERCP related splenic injury have been reported. The first reported case was in 1989, with total of 25 cases reported since then. We discuss the possible implicated mechanism and the alternatives for the management of this unusual complication. Jose M Martinez MD, Diya I Alaedeen MD, Oscar Aljure MD, Emanuele LoMenzo MD, Alberto R Iglesias MD, Atul K Madan MD, Division of Laparoendoscopic Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine Introduction: Pediatric endoscopic rertograde cholagiopancreatography (ERCP) is not routinely performed by most therapeutic endoscopists. The challenges of a pediatric anatomy, pediatric physiology, rare indications, and the need for side viewing endoscope preclude this procedure from becoming popular by pediatric gastroenterologist or laparoendoscopic surgeons. This investigation studied the hypothesis that pediatric ERCP can be performed by an experienced surgical endoscopist efficaciously and safely. Methods: The charts of all patients, younger than 18 years of age, who underwent ERCP by one laparoendoscopic surgeon were retrospectively reviewed. Data collected included age, indications, cannulation rate, stone clearance (if applicable), and complications. Complications were defined as bleeding requiring transfusion or intervention, moderate pancreatitis, or perforation. Results: Eighteen ERCPs were performed on pediatric patients between January 1st 2006 and September 1st 2008. The mean age was 11.3 years old (range 1.5 -17, median 13). Indications for ERCP were choledocholithiasis (n = 8), hyperbilirubinemia after liver transplantation (n = 5), choledocal cyst (n = 1), recurrent pancreatitis (n = 2), cholestasis (n = 1), and primary sclerosing cholangitis (n = 1). The adult endoscope was utilized in 95% of the cases. Cannulation rate was 100%. Stone clearance rate for patients who had evidence of filling defects on ERCP was 100%. There was only one complication of delayed bleeding four days after an ERCP with sphincterotomy. Hemorrhage was controlled successfully via a side-viewing endoscope utilizing ampullary injection and clip application. There were no other complications. Conclusions: While pediatric ERCP requires advanced flexible endoscopy knowledge and technical skills, it can be performed by a surgical endoscopist both safely and efficaciously. Objectives: Diagnostic laparoscopy is an established tool in oncologic evaluation. Standard rigid laparoscopy presents certain limitations in terms of access to various areas of the peritoneal cavity. Other authors have explored the utility of diagnostic laparoscopy with a flexible endoscope via a transgastric or transvaginal approach (NOTES). Our goal is to determine the effectiveness of flexible endoscopy as a tool for diagnostic peritoneoscopy using a transabdominal approach. Methods: Five 25-kg female swine were subjected to general anesthesia. Pneumoperitoneum to 15 mm Hg was achieved with a veress needle. Using a laparoscopic tacking device, 4 tacks were place on the peritoneum in random locations. A separate surgical team that was not present during placement of the tacks then introduced a 2 channel, Storz gastroscope through a periumbilical incision. The team was asked to localize the tacks using the flexible endoscope. Results: Average time for complete exploration and detection of 4 tacks was 20 ± 10 minutes. Two different surgeons with varying degree of expertise with flexible endoscopy were able to detect all the tacks in 5 pigs with a sensitivity of 100%. The subdiaphragmatic area was visualized in all the cases. Conclusion: Transabdominal diagnostic peritoneoscopy using the flexible endoscope is feasible. Potential benefits may allow us to access areas of the peritoneal cavity that were otherwise difficult to access with rigid laparoscopy. Objectives: Standard laparoscopy requires general anesthesia for muscle paralysis to allow for adequate pneumoperitoneum. Our goal is to determine the effectiveness of diagnostic peritoneoscopy using a flexible endoscope under low pressure pneumoperitoneum. Methods: Three 25-kg female swine were subjected to general anesthesia. Pneumoperitoneum to 8 mm Hg was achieved with a veress needle. Using a laparoscopic tacking device, 4 tacks were place on the peritoneum in random locations. A separate surgical team that was not present during placement of the tacks then introduced a 2 channel, Storz gastroscope through a periumbilical incision. The team was asked to localize the tacks using the flexible endoscope. Results: Average time for complete exploration and detection of 4 tacks was 30 ± 10 minutes. Two different surgeons with varying degrees of expertise with flexible endoscopy were able to detect all the tacks in 3 pigs with a sensitivity of 100%. The subdiaphragmatic area was visualized in all the cases. Conclusion: Transabdominal diagnostic peritoneoscopy using the flexible endoscope under low pressure pneumoperitoneum is feasible. Potential benefits may allow us to perform diagnostic peritoneoscopy without the need for general anesthesia and muscle paralysis in an office or urgent care setting. Introduction: The ability of a trauma surgeon to perform flexible endoscopy helps in early and accurate diagnosis of various acute injuries and adds to the bottom line in a predominantly trauma practice. With decrease in operative trauma cases, flexible endoscopy may help to generate enough revenue to sustain trauma practice. Methods: The following data was collected-1) IRB approval retrospective study spread over 3 years 2) # of trauma admissions 3) % of penetrating injuries 4) Total number of trauma operations done by trauma surgeons (excluding sub-specialties) 5) Total number of EGD?s (including PEGs), flexible sigmoidoscopies, colonoscopies and broncoscopies done by trauma surgeons 6) RVU?s for #4 and #5 Results: 4000 trauma cases were reviewed. Out of these approximately 30 % were penetrating trauma. 255 patients had trauma related general surgery procedures. 71 endoscopic procedures, 7 thoracoscopic and 36 abdominal laparoscopic procedures were performed. The procedure codes for the most commonly done procedures in general trauma surgery were 31. 1, 34.02, 34.82, 45.62, 46.73, 46.75, 54.11, 83.14, 83.54 and 86.59 . The RVU?s associated with these procedures ranged between 1.4 to 59.2, with most procedures falling between 10 and 25. On the other hand, the most commonly associated procedure codes for endoscopies were 33. 23, 43.11, 45.23 and 45.24 . The RVU?s for endoscopies ranged between 2 and 8. Conclusion: Flexible endoscopy accounts for a substantial component of charges filled for care for trauma patients. These procedures are routine and easily performed in a short amount of time. Multiple procedures may be done in a regular work day. As a part of trauma surgeon?s armamentarium, they provide for continuity of care. It is thereby worthwhile to promote training in flexible endoscopy and laparoscopy for trauma fellows as an adjunct to their skillset. Rohan Joseph MD, Brian J Dunkin MD, Rob Todd MD, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, TX Introduction: Bronchscopy and laryngoscopy have become common bedside procedures in the ICU. Frequently, however, these modalities utilize non-video platforms which make it difficult for novices to perform the procedures independently. This study evaluated a novel ICU bedside procedure cart for performing video laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy to see if junior level residents could be mentored through these cases independent of attending take-over. Methods: A novel, compact video-endoscopy cart designed for bedside procedures was developed. This cart provides video larynogscopy and bronchoscopy on a combined platform (Karl Storz Endoscopy, Germany). The cart was stored within a surgical ICU in order to foster easy access and to facilitate use. The performance of residents in bedside endoscopy was evaluated to determine independent procedure completion rates and success as well as user satisfaction. Questionnaires were completed at the end of each case by both the trainee and attending and the responses analyzed. Cart malfunction and usefulness as a teaching platform was also evaluated. Results: Eleven evaluations were completed for six bronchoscopies, four percutaneous tracheostomies, and one laryngoscopy/esophagoscopy using the bronchoscope. All procedures were performed by second and third year surgery residents. When an emergent procedure was indicated, less than 10 minutes were required between deciding to do the procedure and initiating it. Nine of 11 procedures were completed successfully. The two ?failed? procedures were not user or device related and, in fact, were due to failure to obtain an adequate broncho-alveolar lavage and oxygen desaturation from intubating a small 7Fr endotracheal tube. None of the diagnostic bronchoscopies required the attending to take over the exam, and 2 of the 4 percutaneous tracheostomies were performed completely by the resident. All resident/attending evaluations ranked the cart at 5/5 usefulness. There were no equipment failures or malfunctions. Conclusion:This novel beside ICU procedure cart proved valuable to attending and resident surgeons alike in enabling junior residents to independently perform bronchoscopy and percutaneous tracheostomy. This work has led to the addition of gastroscopy to the cart capabilities which should greatly enhance its use. Introduction: Upper gastrointestinal (GI) leaks are one of the most important postoperative complications following bariatric surgery. Standard treatment has been a combination of surgical or percutaneous drainage, parenteral nutrition and antibiotics. The endoscopic approach using flexible stents has been recently proposed as an alternative of treatment. Methods and procedures: Restrospective analysis of all patients who underwent endoscopic treatment with self expandable stents of upper GI leaks after bariatric surgery at our institutions. Results: 19 patients were analyzed, 14 with gastric leaks after RYGBP and 5 after LSG. 60% were female. Self expandable stents were used in all patients. Immediate symptomatic improvement occurred in 94.7% of them. Median prosthesis on site days were 132 (range 60-280) in the chilean series and 45 (range 21-91) in Brazil series. Two stent still remains on place (one because of chronic leak and the other by stricture after LSG). One patient needed surgical removal of the stent (5%). Three patients (15%) had broken stents that need to be removed (one by open surgery). Four patients (21%) had stent migration and five patients (26%) had severe reflux symptoms. There were no major complications. Conclusion: Minimally approach with endoscopic stent placement is a safe and feasible option of treatment of upper GI leaks following bariatric surgery. Introduction: Upper endoscopy (UE) is essential in the diagnosis and treatment of complications after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB). Patients who have undergone RYGB present with a variety of functional (nausea, pain, and reflux) as well as obstructive (vomiting and dysphagia) symptoms. The primary aim of this study was to correlate symptoms and endoscopic findings with time of endoscopy after RYGB. Methods and Procedures: Records between July 2006 and September 2008 of patients who underwent UE after RYGB were retrospectively reviewed. A nonconsecutive series of 466 morbidly obese patients were endoscopically evaluated after primary bariatric surgery between July 2006 and September 2008. The endoscopic findings for this cohort were extracted directly from the patients? original endoscopy report, classified, recorded, and matched with their operative date. Results: Of 466 patients who underwent UE after RYGB, 74% had upper gastrointestinal (UGI) symptoms and 26% had weight regain. Symptomatic patients were divided into three groups based on their time interval from RYGB to initial endoscopy. Group I were patients less than one year from RYGB (n = 176). Group II were patients between one and five years (n = 103). Group III were patients greater than five years from RYGB (n = 66). Group I symptoms were obstructive 42%, functional 24%, and combination 17%. Group II symptoms were obstructive 29%, functional 34%, and combination 24%. Group III symptoms were obstructive 19%, functional 65%, and combination 11%. Common endoscopic findings are listed in Table 1 . Abnormal endoscopic findings were multiple in 10% of Group I, 28% of Group II, and 10% of Group III. Conclusions: Early symptoms after RYGB tend to be obstructive and later symptoms tend to be functional. Although endoscopic findings were noted to change over time, our observation is that the presence of symptoms warrant UE regardless of the timing of presentation post RYGB. Introduction: Choledochal cysts are rare cystic dilatations of the biliary tree. Though their etiology is uncertain, these cysts are usually referred for surgical resection because of their association with developing malignancy. Traditionally, choledochal cysts have been classified under five main types. Not included in this classification are cysts of the cystic duct (Type VI), a condition that is even rarer, with only 14 cases reported in the literature to-date. We describe one such rare case of Type VI choledochal cyst which we successfully treated via laparoscopic resection. Methods and Results: A 41-year old male was found to have a biliary abnormality on a routine follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan for an unrelated medical condition. Further magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) imaging identified a cystic dilation consistent with a Type II choledochal cyst. Laparoscopic resection was performed using a total of 5 trocars, at which time a cyst of the cystic duct was found instead of the expected Type II choledochal cyst. Intraoperative cholangiogram was used as a surgical adjunct to confirm the anatomy and resection of the Type VI cyst was completed without complications. Conclusions: Laparoscopic excision is a safe and effective technique for treatment of cysts of the cystic duct. Intraoperative cholangiography is a useful adjunct to confirm the biliary anatomy during laparoscopic resection of choledochal cysts. In addition, we recommend modification of the Todani classification scheme to include Type VI choledochal cysts. Brian Binetti MD, Tejinder P Singh MD, Ward Dunnican MD, Dmitriy Yukhvid BA, Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY Objective: As the paradigm of Single Incision Laparoscopic Surgery (SILS) and Natural Orifice Translumenal Endoscopic Surgery (NOTES) advances, novel techniques and equipment are necessary for its progress. There have been various techniques for SILS cholecystectomy. Specifically, there has been no description of a single fascial incision without the addition of other ports or instruments for retraction. Here we describe a single port surgery (SiPS) cholecystectomy. Methods: We recruited 9 consecutive patients with symptomatic cholelithiasis or acute cholecystitis. Making a 2 cm incision through the umbilicus, we introduced a GelPort system to create pneumoperitoneum. A combination of 2 mm and 5 mm graspers were introduced through the GelPort system. A 5 mm or 10 mm flexible-tip laparoscope was used for visualization. We used either traditional or Autonomy Laparo-Angle electrocautery for dissection of the cystic duct and artery. Both the cystic artery and duct were clipped with a 5 mm clip applier and divided with scissors. The gallbladder was then removed from its fossa with electrocautery and brought out through the wound protector. Results: This procedure was successfully performed in all 9 patients without additional ports. All but two patients were female with a mean age of 46.8 years. Mean operating time was 75.6 minutes. Mean estimated blood loss was 22 milliliters. There were no intra-operative or post-operative complications observed in any patient. Six patients were discharged on the day of surgery. All 9 patients subjectively reported minimal pain post-operatively although no standardized scoring system was used. Conclusion: Our results demonstrated that SiPS cholecystectomy could be safely performed today with current instrumentation. We believe the single port allows greater freedom of hand movements and instrument options. Furthermore, this procedure serves to advance technique development of NOTES by more closely resembling the inline visualization and working space. Further improvements in the instrumentation should improve the outcomes and adoption of this procedure. In the case of an extended hepatectomy, percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization (PTPE) is necessary for a metastatic liver tumor, in order to enlarge the remnant liver. In a case with a giant tumor occuping the right lobe, PTPE would unavoidably injury the remnant liver. There is a method to perform portal vein branch ligation at primary operation especially in a case with simultaneously metastatic liver tumors. But, because this technique may cause extensive adhesion of the hepatoduodenal ligament, surgical treatment might be difficult around the hepatic hilar region at hepaectomy. We approach laparoscopically a right portal vein ligation (LRPL). We report one case of LRPL. A patient was a 43-year-old woman with both a descending colon cancer and a giant metastatic liver tumor in the right lobe. After the primary operation which was laparoscopic colectomy, she underwent chemotherapy. Then we planned extended right lobectomy og the liver, but the remnant liver volume was 28%. Then we performed LRPL and the follow-up CT showed remnant liver hypertrophy (39%). Operation time was 70 minutes and the hospital stay after LRPL was 4 days. We performed right lobectomy by laparoscopic-assisted surgery smoothly. LRPL is feasible technique as one of therapy in a multidisciplinary therapy for colorectal cancer. We will accumulate more cases and examine the results of this method. Conclusions: Bile duct injury is still a major problem at Laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Nowadays the expert surgeon can dissect Calot triangle without any injury to the main bile ducts, but should take care to avoid injury to unexpected accessory or aberrant bile duct in the Calot triangle. From such a point of view, preoperative 3D-DIC CT is thought to be more useful for preoperative simulation in compared to ERC and MRCP. For instance, ERC is tough for the patient and its image is simple two dimension, although MRCP is not so tough but its resolution image is rough (Scan time; 30minutes. Slice thickness; 3 mm. Matrix:256*300 pixels). Contrary, 3D-DIC-CT is less invasive, the unnecessary cost is cleared and its resolution is higher (Scan times; 5minuts. Slice thickness; 0.5 mm. Matrix:512*512 pixels) in comparison with the MRCP. Nobuhiro Ito MD, Hitoshi Inagaki MD, Tsuyoshi Kurokawa MD, Toshiaki Nonami MD, Department of Gastroenterological surgery, Aichi Medical University Background: Hepatectomy is the treatment of choice for hepatocellular carcinoma, but liver function disorders in many cases limit the resectability. Recently, ablation therapy such as radio waves and microwaves are progressing, and the number of nonoperative cases are increasing. However, for protruding-type tumors, the risk of tumor rupture or dissemination has been pointed out. For such cases, laparoscopic hepatectomy provides radical treatment and minimal invasiveness. For a hepatocellular carcinoma protruding out of the liver, in principle the cervix region of the tumor is ablated by microwaves, and excision is feasible using a laparosonic coagulating shears. Aim and Methods: In our hospital, we started laparoscopic hepatectomy in August, 2000, and 23 cases were performed by May, 2008. 8 of those cases were hepatocellular carcinomas with protrusions outside the liver. We analyzed these cases for the location of the tumor, tumor diameter, preoperative liver function, operation time, amount of bleeding, postoperative complication and postoperative hospitalization days. Results: The mean age of patients was 59.6 years old, with a sex ratio of 3 to 5. As for the location of tumors, there were 5 in the lateral segment, and 3 others were S4, S5, and S6 respectively. Tumor size ranged from 20 mm to 70 mm with an average of 38.3 mm. As for liver function, 6 were 5 in Child-Pugh score and 2 were 7. Mean operative time was 184.1 minutes, mean operative blood loss was 168.1 g, mean excision liver weight was 47.6 g. There was no case of conversion to laparotomy. Postoperative complications were only experienced by 2 patients; one wound infection and one wound bleeding. There was no mortality and the median hospital stay was 17.25 days. Conclusion: Hepatocellular carcinoma with extrahepatic protrusion is a good indication of laparoscopic hepatectomy, because the liver cutting is small and it is rare for a vas to run around the tumor. Operations in our cases were done safely without complications. Laparoscopic hepatectomy for protrusion-type hepatocellular carcinoma is safe and minimally invasive. Introduction: A prospective audit was undertaken of true day case laparoscopic cholecystectomies performed by a single surgeon in a DGH. The audit aims primarily to ascertain the outcome of the operation and patients? satisfaction with the experience. Data was analysed to identify factors that led to overnight admissions. Methods: Data collected using audit proformas. Collected data included intra-and post-operative analgesics and antiemetics and a phone survey of patients on the day after the operation. We obtained postoperative complications and admissions data from patients? records. Results: 22 patients were admitted for day case laparoscopic cholecystectomy between June 07 and May 08. 17 (77%) were discharged on the same day. 5 patients (23%) were admitted, of these: 2 (40%) were discharged within 24 h and 3 (60%) were discharged within 36 h. Indications for overnight admission were: optimisation of pain relief 4(80%) and pyrexia 1(20%). All patients were happy or very happy with their anaesthesia and analgesia. No patients required readmission after discharge. Statistically significant factors leading to admission are: length of operations (p = 0.0007), not administering Diclofenac intraoperatively (p = 0.003) and postoperatively (p = 0.025), administering Cyclizine intraoperatively (p = 0.002) and post operatively (p = 0.001), adminstration of Morphine post-operatively (p = 0.004) and not administering Ondansetron postoperatively (p = 0.003). Conclusions: This audit showed that day case laparoscopic cholecystectomy service met its objectives with a low rate of overnight admission, and no readmissions. Patients were satisfied with their experience. The audit identified factors that could lead to overnight admission. These require further assessment in a larger cohort. Background: Laparoscopic ablation and resection of liver tumors is rapidly gaining momentum. Well over a decade ago, monopolar RFA devices were introduced and replaced cryoablation as the preferred modality for ablating liver tumors. Bipolar RFA technology which requires placement of two probes works fast and can be used for two distinct purposes. We describe our early experience using laparoscopic bipolar RFA technology for (1) tumor ablation, (2) parenchymal precoagulation prior to transection, and in selected cases both applications were used. Methods: We reviewed our prospectively maintained database of patients with liver tumors treated by laparoscopic approach utilizing the bipolar RFA device. We identified 14 patients that underwent laparoscopic RFA of liver tumors, resection or both procedures. RFA alone was used in patients with contraindications to resection or as bridge therapy toward transplantation. We analyzed the indications and operative approach for these operations. Some procedures were done with the patient in the left lateral decubitus and others in the supine position. The liver is fully mobilized off of the retroperitoneum and diaphragm to fully access the tumor baring segments. RFA was done using the InCircle (RFA-medical) bipolar probes in all cases. During laparoscopic resections, the parenchyma was precoagulated using the Monarch probes (RFAmedical) which have linearly oriented deployable tines. In most cases parenchymal division was done using the Gyrus cutting bipolar forceps (Olympus) depending on nature of the liver parenchyma. Results: Of the 14 study patients, 8 underwent totally laparoscopic liver resections and 6 underwent laparoscopic RFA alone. The median age was 64.4 (range 44-82). The indications for surgery included primary liver tumors in 12 cases (hepatocellular carcinoma = 10; cholangiocarcinoma = 1; hepatic adenoma = 1) and metastatic tumors in 2 cases (breast and colorectal). All hepatomas arose in the context of chronic HCV and thus some degree of fibrosis/cirrhosis. Among those patients treated by RFA alone, the average tumor size was 4.0 cm (range 2.3-6). Two patients underwent concomitant procedures (cholecystectomy in 1; placement of gold fiducials in 1). Totally laparoscopic resections were completed in 8 patients. None required conversion to open. The average tumor size was 4.2(range 2.9-5). Of these, 6 patients underwent anatomic resection (2 formal right hepatectomies, 2 posterior sectorectomies, 2 monosegmentectomies: seg 5, seg 2). Two other patients underwent non-anatomic resections both in segment 6. Conclusion: Laparoscopic Bipolar RFA technology can be used as an adjunct to totally laparoscopic hepatic resections or tumor ablation alone. While multiple energy devices exist for tumor ablation or parenchymal precoagulation, only the Bipolar RFA device can be used efficiently for both purposes. Bipolar RFA is an excellent alternative to monopolar RFA technology and may be next in line as the preferred energy for treating liver tumors. Michael A Sawyer MD, Videoendoscopic Surgical Institute of Oklahoma, Comanche County Memorial Hospital, Lawton, Oklahoma Report of case: A 41 year old woman was referred by a gastroenterologist for chronic abdominal pain of six months? duration. She described pain that occurred frequently throughout the day, typically lasting between 30 minutes and two hours. The pain was mainly epigastric but had a colicky right upper quadrant component also. She described severe postprandial attacks that had limited her alimentation to mainly liquids over the previous two months. She had an involuntary weight loss of 8 to 10 pounds over the six month period. An extensive workup including upper and lower endoscopic examinations, a barium swallow with small bowel follow through and a CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis had been done. Salient findings included situs inversus abdominis. The spleen and stomach were on the right, the proximal jejunum and majority of the small intestine were located on the left, while the entire colon was in the right abdomen. The gallbladder was centrally located between two large hepatic lobes. Base on the patient?s symptoms, an abdominal ultrasound and radionuclide hepatobiliary scan were completed. The ultrasound was normal. The radionuclide scan featured normal gallbladder filling and an ejection fraction of 19.8%. A diagnosis of biliary dyskinesia was made. Technique: The patient was placed in the low lithotomy position with the surgeon positioned between the patient?s legs. Abdominal access was gained with a non-bladed 11 mm trocar just superior to the umbilicus. A 30 degree 10 mm laparoscope was used. Additional trocars were placed under direct visualization and included a 5 mm trocar in the right upper abdominal quadrant and two 5 mm trocars in the left upper abdominal quadrant. Anatomical variations included the portal vein crossing anterior to the common hepatic duct and the presence of a very short cystic duct. The domedown approach was very useful and allowed excellent exposure of critical structures. The cystic duct was isolated, clipped and divided. The gallbladder was removed and the the trocar sites closed. Results: The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged home the same day. She was seen in the office a week later and was doing well. She remains asymptomatic 8 months after surgery. Discussion. Gallbladder disease in patients with situs inversus abdominis presents a unique set of challenges centering on significant anatomical abnormalities. The laparoscopic approach is safe and effective. Several modifications may be helpful including variations in patient positioning, the use of alternate trocar locations and the domedown dissection technique. The contemporary approach to treatment of acute pancreatitis (AP) is far from satisfactory. This resulted in the increased number of AP patients as well as increased number of cases that developed complications. Our idea is not an original one since we strictly followed the guidelines of the World and European Pancreatic Societies that recommend obtaining as conservative as possible approach for the AP treatment during the stage of aseptic inflammation. We performed the series of retrospective clinical observations aimed to compare the efficacy of the previous immediate surgical interventions in the case of AP with the tactics of accurate adequate conservative treatment. Clinical observations were performed during the last 5 years. Surgical treatment was used in the case of the patients general condition worsening. For the new methodology of the non operative treatment we used the intensive medical therapy including antibiotics, antioxidants, antiinflammatory and antinociceptive drugs. Inhibition of pancreatic secretion was also applied. Briefly, the non operative treatment of AP was complex and required day-by-day and week-by-week re-evaluation of the patients? condition with the treatment tailored to the changes that rapidly occurred in critical patients. From 99 patients operated during the very first days in the hospital, 13 patients improved general condition, 61 patients demonstrated stable clinical manifestation with the mild prolonged shift to the improvement, 19 patients needed repeated operations and 6 patients died. In the group of 120 patients to whom we applied the intensive conservative treatment, 75 patients recovered soon. Stable clinical manifestation was observed in 33 patients, 9 underwent traditional surgical interventions and 3 patients died. These data are in strong correspondence with the leading opinion that pancreatic gland sterile aseptic inflammation should not be operated but treated conservatively. Our results are significantly better compared with the results of the AP traditional treatment. This might have important medical and social implications, since the patients with AP often represent the working category of people and it is of crucial importance to restore their working abilities in terms of their quality of life and economic contribution to the society. Objective: Suppurative pylephlebitis or chronic thrombophlebitis of the portal vein is an uncommon but serious complication of intra-abdominal infection. Once common in the pre-antibiotic era, pylephlebitis continues to carry a significant mortality rate. To our knowledge cholangitis secondary to choledocholithiasis has been documented only once in the literature, and never following ERCP or open cholecystecomy. This article reviews the clinical findings, radiological features as well the pathogenesis and treatment modalities involved in the management of this distinctive infectious phenomenon. Methods: This report focuses on the case of a 64 year old man presenting with acute cholangitis secondary to choledocholithiasis. The patient underwent endoscopic extraction of biliary stones and sphincterotomy. Subsequently laparoscopic cholecystectomy was attempted. This was converted to open procedure as a result of severe inflammation of the gallbladder. A small but persistent bile leak was drained percutaneously by interventional radiology. The output from that drain tapered quickly and it was removed shortly before his discharge. He returned shortly four days later complaining of fever, and abdominal pain and was found to have Klebsiella pneumonia bacteremia. CT demonstrated thrombosis of the left portal vein and its branches. Repeat CT scan two days later revealed a persistent bile leak. Percutaneous drainage of the biliary leak was performed and cultures from that fluid tested positive for Klebsiella pneumonia. On discharge the patient was placed on a regimen of antibiotics and anticoagulation. Follow up CT after six weeks showed a degree of resolution of phlebitic inflammation; however no recanalization of the thrombosed aspect of portal vein was noted at that time. Results: A high degree of clinical suspicion and early CT imaging are imperative in making an early diagnosis of what is both a rare and insidious disease process. This case is unique in that the infection occurred in the delayed post-operative setting for treatment of infected choledocholithiasis. Since pylephlebitis is such an uncommon process the utilization of separate therapies, remains a difficult task in optimizing outcome. Diverse treatment mechanisms have been described including antibiotic therapy, anticoagulation, and percutaneous drainage of the portal venous system. However, limited information exists regarding these the use of these treatments, alone or in combination. Therefore pylephlebitis as illustrated in this report requires keen instinct and proper radiological imaging to make an early diagnosis, but continues to present a therapeutic challenge in modern medical practice. Results: Among 1120 patients who underwent cholecystectomy, 25 had preoperative diagnosis of gallbladder polyps by abdominal ultrasonography (2.3%). The most common symptom was abdominal pain resembling biliary colic, existing in all 25 patients. Ultrasonography revealed immobile polypoid lesion attached to the mucosal surface, having posterior acoustic shadow in all cases. Polyps were defined as sessile in 22 (88%) patients and pedunculated in 3 (12%). Co-existing gallbladder stone was detected in 7 patients with abdominal ultrasonography (28%). Cholecystectomy was performed laparoscopicaly in 18 patients and open technique was used for the first 7 patients. Histopathological examination revealed cholesterol polyps in 9 patients (36%), adenoma in 2 (8%) and gallbladder adenocarcinoma in 1 case (4%). Pathological diagnoses were chronic cholecystitis with gallbladder stones in 13 cases (52%) which were thought to be polyps under ultrasonographical examination. Conclusion: Preoperative assessment of gallbladder polyps is a challenging issue for both radiologists and surgeons. Once gallbladder polyp is detected and diagnosed surgery is the choice of treatment in all symptomatic cases, when polyp size is greater than 10 mm and in patients older than 50 years of age due to the risk of malignancy. Introduction: Although the role of laparoscopic ultrasound (LUS) during staging laparoscopy for pancreatic cancers is well established there is no consensus as to whether it provides useful information over and above other imaging modalities. Aim:To evaluate the value of intra-operative LUS in the pre-operative assessment of pancreatic cancer. Methods: A retrospective consecutive case series consisting of patients undergoing pre-operative staging for pancreatic carcinoma in two centres (Centre A and B) was carried out over a 5-year period . It was routine practice to perform staging laparoscopy for pancreatic cancers considered potentially resectable on multi-planar CT. Staging laparoscopy was performed using a standardised 3-port protocol using a 30-degree laparoscope. Patients in Centre B also underwent LUS using a 7.5 MHz probe. All suspicious lesions were sent for histological assessment for confirmation of malignancy. Results: There were 54 patients in centre A and 51 in Centre B. There were no differences between the two centres for patient demographics and tumour site. There was no difference between the two centres for the detection of metastatic disease using staging laparoscopic assessment alone (A-7.2% vs. B-7.84%, p = 1.0). However, there was a significant difference in additional findings (7.2% vs. 25%, p = 0.037) with the use of LUS in Centre B. The additional findings (n = 9) were portal vein involvement (n = 5) and superior mesenteric vein involvement (n = 3), stomach and liver metastasis (n = 1) and local extension (n = 1). These patients were offered palliative treatment. In the remaining 42 patients who were deemed suitable for resection, 5 patients were found to be inoperable during the laparotomy. 4 patients had an irresectable vascular pedicle involvement [Coeliac trunk (n = 2), SMV (n = 1), PV (n = 1)]. One patient had diffuse metastatic disease (n = 1). Conclusion: The addition of LUS increased the detection rate of advanced disease by 17%, thus making it a useful pre-operative adjuvant staging modality. It is especially useful in assessing vascular involvement. In our series the false negative rate was 11% (n = 5/42). Introduction: Laparoscopy can represent an useful tool in the management of patients undergoing reoperation for gallbladder cancer detected after the study of the cholecystectomy specimen. The aim of this study is to evaluate the feasibility and outcome of a series of patients undergoing initial laparoscopic management . Methods and Procedures : According a prospective protocol, between July 2005 and January 2008, 16 patients (two males, median age 56 years) harboring a gallbladder cancer detected after the exam of the cholecystectomy specimen were admitted. Of these, 11 had invasion of the subserosal layer (T2), four of the serosa, (T3) and one of the muscle layer (T1b). Of the patients, 5 had undergone a previous open cholecystectomy while 11 had a laparoscopic procedure. Lymph node metastasis, peritoneal recurrence and technical difficulties were indications for conversion Results: All patients underwent laparoscopic reoperation. Intervention was finished after the initial exploration in three patients. Of these, in one patient peritoneal recurrence was observed while the other two patients did not have a good general condition to perform the resection. Conversion to an open procedure after a negative exam of the abdominal cavity was performed in 9 patients. Of these patients, in three the open exploration allowed the detection of metastatic tumor undiscovered during the laparoscopic procedure. Main cause of the lack of detection was the presence of dense adhesions in the subhepatic area that made difficult a complete exam. In the rest of patients and after a negative open exploration a lymphadenectomy associated with the resection of segments IVb and V was performed. In four patients and after a negative laparoscopic exploration, the resection by laparoscopy was attempted. Carbon dioxide pressures were maintained between 8-12 mmHg. In general, 5 ports including two 10/12 ports were employed. Of these patients, in three a complete lymphadenectomy of the hepatic pedicle associated with the resection of the gallbladder bed was performed . In the other patient, the presence of a metastatic lymph node in the hepatoduodenal ligament was the indication to finish the resection after conversion . Laparoscopic liver resection was performed using harmonic and stapling for large vessels. Surgical specimen was extracted through an enlarged port. Neither postoperative morbidity nor mortality was observed in the series . Perioperative blood transfusion was not employed in any of the patients. Among those undergoing resection, recurrence was observed only in one patient, while the rest of patients are alive and free of recurrence with a complete follow-up. Conclusion:Laparoscopy may be employed in the management of patients with early forms of gallbladder cancer undergoing reoperation. Although the presence of adhesions might result in an inadequate exploration, there is a subset of patients in whom is possible to perform a complete exam. Further, laparoscopic lymphadenectomy and gallbladder bed resection is a promising technique in well selected patients. Larger studies are required to confirm its oncologic value. Methods: Our fluorescent cholangiography technique is based on the principle that ICG is excreted into bile and that protein-bound ICG emits light with a peak wavelength of around 830 nm when illuminated with near-infrared light. The prototype fluorescent imaging system is comprised of a xenon light source, a small control unit, and a laparoscope 10 cm in diameter with a charge-coupled device camera, which can filter out light with wavelengths below 810 nm. In 5 patients undergoing LC for cholecystolithiasis, one milliliter (2.5 mg/mL) of ICG was intravenously injected two hours before surgery. The abdominal cavity was insufflated, and the laparoscope was introduced through a subumbilical trocar. After the hepatoduodenal ligament was identified, color images were changed to fluorescent images using a foot switch. Preliminary results: Fluorescent cholangiography clearly delineated the cystic duct and the common bile duct in all patients prior to the dissection of triangle of Calot (Fig. 1) . The common hepatic duct was identified in 4 of the 5 patients. In one patient, fluorescent cholangiography delineated gallstones in the cystic duct and the information was helpful to select the optimal point to transect the cystic duct (Fig. 2) . The fluorescence of the biliary tract lasted throughout the procedures of LC (72-125 minutes). No adverse reactions to the ICG were encountered. Conclusions: Fluorescent cholangiography using intravenous injection of ICG may become the optimal tools to confirm the biliary tract anatomy during LC because it has potential advantages over radiographic cholangiography in that it does not require irradiation or dissection of triangle of Calot. Introduction: Although pseudocyst formation is common following pancreatitis, their erosion into the spleen is a rare, but potentially life threatening event. We report a case of intrasplenic pancreatic pseudocyst treated laparoscopically with distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. Methods: A 50 year old African American male, with a past medical history significant for chronic alcohol induced pancreatitis, presented with complaints of a 3 month history of abdominal pain, worsening over the past several days. Initially, the patient was diagnosed with pancreatitis and treated accordingly. Because of the persistent pain, a computed tomography scan was obtained. The spleen was almost entirely replaced by a 9 cm subcapsular fluid collection suspicious for an intra-splenic pseudocyst. The patient underwent electively laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. Results: There were no intraoperative complications. The patient resumed diet on the third postoperative day and he was discharged home on day 8. The final pathology revealed a benign cystic lesion measuring 9 · 6 · 3 cm in size which was not in communication with the pancreatic duct. There were also 2 smaller pseudocysts in the pancreatic body and tail. A previous scan did not reveal any abnormalities in the spleen, and showed the other pancreatic pseudocysts. At 8 months, the patient has had no recurrent symptoms. Conclusions: Splenic parenchyma involvement is an unusual complication of pancreatic pseudocyst. The optimal treatment is controversial. Percutaneous drainage carries a high recurrence rate and risk of hemorrhage. Open surgery is effective, but is associated with significant morbidity. The laparoscopic offers an effective method of treatment without the potential complication of a large abdominal incision. The purpose of this report is to present the clinical outcomes of the L-PPPD to verify the feasibility and safety and to compare the laparoscopic assisted PPPD to totally laparoscopic PPPD in a single institutional study. (Patients and method) 16 laparoscopic assisted PPPD and 5 totally laparoscopic PPPD were performed since May 2007 for 18 benign and 1 endocrine carcinoma and 2 invasive malignant neoplasm. For laparoscopic assisted PPPD, reconstruction was performed extracorporeally for pancreaticojejunostomy, duodenojejunostomy and jejunojejunostomy through the specimen removal wound, and choledochojejunostomy was performed with intracorporeal laparoscopic For totally laparoscopic PPPD, all procedures were done intracorporeally with extraction of specimen through the small pubic line. (Results) There was no operative mortality in both groups. Median operative time (from the time of skin incision for the first trocar to the time of skin closure of the last port,including resting time for surgeons) was 9.4hr in laparoscopic assisted PPPD, and 9.7 hr in totally laparoscopic PPPD(P > 0.05). Postoperative complications were developed in 7 patients (46.6%) in laparoscopic assisted PPPD including two(13.3%) cases of pancreatic fistula and three cases of biliary fistula, and one case of pseduaneurysm bleeding in laparoscopic assisted PPPD. There is one case of PJ leak in totally laparoscopic PPPD. Hospital stay was similar in both groups. High BMI was the only significant factor for postoperative complications (Conclusion) Technically, L-PPPD is feasible with acceptable mortality, and totally laparoscopic PPPD could be performed with comparable results to laparoscopic assisted PPPD However high morbidty in high BMI patient remains as hurdles to overcome for LPPPD to be a standard procedure. consecutive patients with HCC who underwent LH were compared in a retrospective analysis with a historical group of 16 patients who underwent OH (procedures: left lateral sectionectomy, less than subsegmentectomy). Two groups were well matched age, tumor size and location, type of hepatic resection, and grade of cirrhosis. The selection criteria for both groups specified a small (size: < 5 cm), subcapsular tumor located in the left lateral lobe or peripheral right segments of the liver (Couinaud?fs segment: II-VI). The patients with severe cirrhosis were excluded in this study. Results: One patient in the LH group underwent emergent conversion to laparotomy due to severe hypotension by gas embolism. The mean operative time was similar in both groups (LH: 261 min, OH: 281 min). The mean blood loss in the LH was less than OH group, with significance difference (112 ml [10-240] vs 472 ml [100-900], p < 0.03). The mean hospital stay in the LH group was 16 days, was significantly shorter than OH group (23 days). There was no mortality in perioperative period in both groups. Critical complication was not observed except 1 case of gas embolism in the LH group, however, the patient has recovered without getting serious. Conclusions: LH is a procedure of significant risk and is more technically demanding compared to traditional OH, however, LH for HCC in selective patients is a safe, effective procedure with better short-term outcome. Background: Current literature on laparoscopic liver resection has focused on technical aspects and peri-operative morbidity. The aim of this study was to prospectively analyze oncologic outcome in a group of patients with malignant liver tumors. Methods: Within a 2.5-year period, fifteen patients with malignant liver tumors underwent laparoscopic liver resection using a variety of techniques. These patients had liver only disease on preoperative CT scans as well as PET scans in 5 patients. Tumors were peripherally located (segments 2, 3, 4b, 5 and 6). All patients were followed up systematically under a protocol with quarterly CT scans and tumor markers. All data are expressed as mean ± standard error of mean. Results: Mean age was 65.4 ± 2.4 years. Pathology included colorectal metastasis (n = 11), HCC (n = 3) and GIST (n = 1) metastasis. Fourteen patients had a solitary lesion, with one patient having 2 lesions. Mean tumor size was 3.0 ± 0.4 cm. Liver metastasis was synchronous in 8 and metachronous in 4 patients. Seven of 11 patients with colorectal metastasis received preoperative chemotherapy. The patient with GIST metastasis received preoperative imatinib. The procedures were performed fully laparoscopic in 6 patients, hand-assisted in 8 patients and using a hybrid technique in 1 patient. Procedures included right hepatectomy (n = 1), left lateral sectionectomy (n = 6), right posterior sectionectomy (n = 1) and segmentectomy (n = 7). Mean operative time was 194 ± 16 minutes and estimated blood loss 265 ± 111 ml. Mean surgical margin was 0.9 ± 0.2 cm and microscopically positive in 2 patients. Resections were performed either using a technique of pre-coagulation with radiofrequency ablation (RF) catheters or post-coagulation with the TissueLink to achieve a greater functional resection margin. Hospital stay was 3.0 ± 0.4 days. During a median follow-up of 17 months, all patients were alive. Three patients (colorectal, n = 2 and HCC, n = 1) developed new liver lesions and 1 patient pelvic recurrence. There were no recurrences at the resection margin. Conclusions: Although there is a relatively small number of patients with shortterm follow up in this study, the lack of recurrence at the resection margin over time indicates that laparoscopic liver resection is oncologically comparable to open surgery. We believe that pre or post-coagulation with RF can potentially decrease resection margin recurrences. Close periodic follow up of these patients is essential to determine complete resection. Introduction: There is controversy about the effectiveness of intraperitoneal local anesthesia in laparoscopic surgery. We designed a prospective randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of intraperitoneal ropivacaine washout (IRW) in the early recovery period after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Methods: A total of 62 consecutive patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy due to uncomplicated symptomatic gallstones were randomized to the IRW or control group. In the IRW group, ropivacaine at body temperature (30 ml/kg of body weight) was irrigated under diaphragm before surgery. The fluid was evacuated via the passive-flow method through a close drain for 24 hours. Postoperatively, pain was assessed with a 100-point visual analogue scale (VAS) at 2, 4, 8, 12, and 24 hours. The incidence of shoulder-tip pain and total dose of patients controlled analgesics (PCA) were also recorded. Results: Mean VAS scores were significantly lower in the IRW group than in the control group from 2 to 8 hours after LC (54.90 versus 31.85; P = 0.02). Preemptive application of ropivacaine significantly reduced the postoperative dose of PCA at 2, 4, and 8 hours after surgery (32.9 versus 25.4 mg per 8 h; P = 0.043). The consumption of PCA as well as the pain score was lower but not statistically significant in patients in IRW group compared with those in control group from 12 to 24 hours following surgery. However, preoperative application of ropivacaine did not reduce the incidence of shoulder-tip pain and complication related with PCA use. Conclusion: Intraperitoneal irrigation with ropivacaine to the both hemidiaphragms at the beginning of surgery reduced early postoperative pain and analgesic (PCA) requirement after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. METHOD: A retrospective review was conducted on the data of 2,523 laparoscopic cholecystectomies performed at Chung-Ang University Hospital from January 2002 to July 2007. Patients? sex, age, height, weight, BMI (Body Mass Index), duration of preoperative hospital stay, preoperative physical examination, laboratory data, radiologic findings, and the reason for conversion to open procedure were evaluated. RESULTS: Adhesion was perceived to be the most critical factor for conversion shown in 50.5% (n = 56) out of total 111 cases. Bleeding (22.5%), bile duct injury (11.7%), inflammation (9.0%), and uncertain anatomy (6.3%) were followed sequentially. By univariate analysis, factors found to increase significantly the risk of conversion were patient age > 70 years, male sex, previous abdominal operation, preoperative common bile duct stone, tenderness in right upper quadrant, distended shape of gallbladder, and pericholecystic fluid collection. From multivariate analysis, the following factors were identified to be associated with a higher risk: patient age > 70 years (p = 0.002), male sex (p = 0.012), previous abdominal operation (p < 0.0001), and preoperative common bile duct stone (p = 0.041). CONCLUSION:In case of operations with such discerning factors, surgeons should be more cautious and delicate in all procedures throughout the operative period. Also, to reduce additional severe complications, surgeons need to decide early into conversion. Background: With rapid development and wide application of laparoscopic procedure in biliary surgery, laparoscopic Roux-en-Y hepatico-or choledochojejunostomy is being performed more frequently than ever since our first report on 2004. Method: Between February 1997 and September 2008, 36 patients underwent laparoscopic biliary-enteric anastomosis with the diagnosis of choledochal cyst, recurrent CBD stone, intrahepatic duct stone or bilary stricture. Results: The diagnosis of the patients were choledochal cyst in 23, recurrent CBD stone in 8, intrahepatic duct stone in 2, biliary stricture in 2, and Mirizzi syndrome in 1. The Roux limb was divided with an endo-GIA was brought up in the antecolic method. Hepatico-or choledo-chojejunostomy was performed with intracorporeal suture, and then jejunojejunostomy was done with the endo-GIA. For the patients with choledochal cyst, cyst excision was performed prior to this procedure. The mean operation time were 308.4 minutes. Intraoperative transfusion was needed in one patient 2.8%. The postoperative complication occurred in 5 patients (16.7%), including bile leakage (n = 2), aspiration pneumonia (n = 1), melena (n = 1), intraabominal fluid collection (n = 1) and intraabominal bleeding (n = 1); one patient with intraabominal bleeding was treated by re-operation and the others were improved by conservative management. The mean postoperative hospital stay was 9.5 days. After a mean follow-up of 17.7 months, 6 patients (16.7%) experienced the anastomotic stricture, which were managed by radiologic intervention in four patients and revision of anastomosis in two patients. Conclusions: Laparoscopic Roux-en-Y hepatico-or choledocho-jejunostomy is a useful option in the treatment for the patients with biliary disease. Purpose: The purpose of this work was to evaluate the short term results of the laparoscopic-assisted anatomical liver resections utilizing the hanging technique. Methods and Procedures: From August 2006 to July 2008, there were 13 laparoscopic-assisted anatomical liver resection for treatment of primary and metastatic neoplasm of liver?@?i4 hepatocellular carcinoma, one cholangiocellular carcinoma, 7 metastasis of colon cancer, one metastasis of ovary carcinoma?jcarried out at our hospital. The patients? mean age was 64?}10 years. Tumor mean size was 4.0?}2.5 cm (range: 2 to 10 cm). The operation consisted of laparoscopic mobilization of the target liver lobe, followed by open liver resection through a 8-12 cm extraction site. The hanging technique was performed in all cases, which was effective for control of bleeding and guide of direction during anatomic parenchymal transection in a narrow space through the mini-laparotomy. The advantage of this operation is that the same technique and instruments for parenchymal transection than used for open surgery can be used. On the other hand, the laparoscopic technique, which we have to learn, only requires mobilization of the liver to perform the same minimally invasiveness in liver surgery as by totally laparoscopic procedure. Results: There were 3 lateral sectionectomy, one anterior sectionectomy, 2 posterior sectionectomy, one left hepatectomy and 6 right hepatectomy. The mean operative time was 376?}130minutes. The mean blood loss was 626?}627 ml and blood transfusion was required in one case of anterior sectionectomy. There were no intraoperative complications and no conversion to laparotomy. Pathological examination showed R0 resections in all cases. Postoperative complications developed in 2 patients (2 bile leaks, 15.3%), all of which was improved by conservative management. However, there was no postoperative mortality. Recurrence was detected in 4 cases of metastases of colon cancer during a mean-follow-up of 11.8 months. Conclusion:laparoscopic-assisted anatomical liver resection is safe and technically feasible. More data may be needed for evaluation of long-term outcome. Objectives: Intraoperative visualization of liver vessels and tumor margins is an important tool during minimal invasive liver surgery. Aim of this study was to evaluate a high field open MR for intraoperative real time imaging as an alternative to laparoscopic ultrasound. In order to realize minimal invasive liver surgery under MR guidance we developed and applied a MR compatible endoscopy unit encompassing a high resolution camera and a non-ferromagnetic laparoscope. Initial experience was gained through phantom models and porcine cadavers. Subsequently liver dissection was performed in two living house pigs. Methods: All procedures were conducted in a 1.0 Tesla open MRI unit (Philips Panorama). During the operation the MR and the endoscopic images were displayed on two separate monitors. A 1064 nm Nd:YAG laser was used for tissue dissection and coagulation. The laparoscope and the endoscopic instruments were introduced into the abdominal cavity through conventional ports. Additionally a MR compatible hand port was inserted for intraabdominal manipulation. Two living house pigs were subjected to a left lateral liver lobe resection and were immediately sacrificed after the operation. Intraoperative MR images clinical outcomes were documented and analyzed. Results: The total duration of the intervention ranged from 126 to 145 min with a dissection time from 11 to 15 min. Both animals survived the intervention with a blood loss of 250 and 170 ml and a specimen weight of 138 and 177 g. A dynamic T2 W fast spinecho sequence allowed real time imaging (1.5 images/s) with a good delineation of major and small hepatic vessels. The newly developed MR compatible instruments and camera system caused only minor interferences and artifacts of the MR image. The laser instrument carried a signal intense marker and was depicted in relation to the resection plane and neighboring vessels. The intraoperative orientation of the surgeon was increased through the additional image information. Present drawbacks include the limited working space and the time consuming positioning of MR image planes. Conclusions: Our preliminary results show that MR guided liver resection is feasible providing additional image information to the surgeon. We conclude that MR guided laparoscopic liver resection improves the anatomical orientation and may increase the safety of future minimal invasive liver surgery. Introduction: Laparoscopic liver resection (LLR) for benign and malignant liver tumors has become a popular modality over the last decade in many centers. The reports from the high volume centers suggest that LLR has shorter hospital stay, lower hospital charge and lower complication rate compared to open charge. We wanted to validate the safety, in-hospital outcomes and cost of LLR as compared to open liver resection (OLR) by using a national database. Methods: Retrospective analysis of the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (representative 20% sample from 37 states) (2000 through 2006) . Patients with diagnosis of benign and malignant primary liver tumors were included and then divided into two groups: OLR and LLR. Outcomes measured were related to in-hospital stay which included length of stay, complication, in-hospital death, and hospital charges. Results: A total of 2,509 patients were identified for both cohorts with 73 patients (2.9%) in LLR group. Both groups were comparable (p > 0.05) in their demographics in regards to mean age, race, gender and Charlson?s morbidity score. Both groups received care in large urban teaching centers (89% LLR vs. 84% OLR, p = 0.65). LLR had no complications compared to 4.8% in OLR group (p = 0.05). No significant difference was seen in length of stay, in-hospital death and average hospitalization charge between the two groups. On multivariate analysis, the variables to predict in-hospital death by adjusted odds ratio were type of insurance (HMO reference) (Medicare OR 1.95, 95% CI 0.97 ) 3.91) (Medicaid OR 2.97, 95% CI 1.26 ) 7.0), age (OR 1.04, 95% CI 1.01 ) 1.06), Charlson?s score (OR 1.14, 95% CI 1.03 ) 1.25), hospital cost (OR 2.1, 95% CI 1.74 ) 2.53) and male gender (OR 0.53, 95% CI 0.31 ) 0.9). Type of resection ABSTRACT Background: Strictures of common bile duct and other extra hepatic biliary tree pathologies are sometimes encountered in surgical practice. The aim of the study is to provide in data to establish whether laparoscopic approach for hepaticojejunostomy is better than open hepaticojejunostomy. Method: The data presented in this paper is obtained from a single centre and performed on 28 cases, requiring hepaticojejunostomy due to one of the reasons (stricture CBD, Choledochal Cyst, Injury to CBD during surgery, Mrrizi?s syndrome) over a period of three years. The perioperative and post operative course was compared between the two approaches (laparoscopic 17 cases and open 11 cases). In both the approaches, Roux-n-Y Hepaticojejunostomies was performed . Results: The Intra operative time taken was more in initial laparoscopic hepaticojejunostomies (mean three hours) than the open hepaticojejunostomy(mean two hours) but time reduced after performing few cases (mean two and a half hours). In the post operative period patients were more comfortable with laparoscopic hepaticojejunostomy. The hospital stay was reduced (mean five days) than the open hepaticojejunostomy (mean seven days). The leakage from anastamotic site was far less in laparoscopic technique. The bowel movements returned faster in laparoscopic method. The pain was far less in laparoscopic method than the open. The number of interrupted vicryl sutures applied for hepaticojejunostomy in laparoscopic method were far well placed than the open method. Conclusions: Laparoscopic hepaticojejunostomy is clearly more technically demanding procedure but at the same time yields better results than open hepaticojejunostomy. It is not associated with increased risk of post operative complications and thus demonstrates that the patients requiring hepaticojejunostomy can benefit to a higher extent from the laparoscopic modality. Background: CT-guided radiofrequency ablation (CT-RFA) is presumed to be less morbid and less costly than laparoscopic RFA (L-RFA). CT-RFA, however, has a higher treatment failure rate than L-RFA. This analysis looks at the 30-day morbidity and financial data for CT-RFA versus L-RFA for hepatocellular cancer (HCC) and colorectal liver metastases (CRLM). Methods: All patients with the diagnosis of CRLM or HCC who underwent CT-RFA or L-RFA at our institution between 2002-2008, were reviewed retrospectively. Demographics, risk stratification and procedural data were analyzed. Hospital financial data was queried for total cost, reimbursement and itemized departmental charges. Patients with CRLM or HCC were evaluated separately. Results: Twenty-two RFA procedures were performed for the treatment of CRLM ( Hospital financial data is summarized in Table 1 . Conclusion: Patients with CRLM are generally more tolerant of surgery than patients with HCC. Our data suggests that in patients with CRLM, CT-RFA is less expensive but poorly reimbursed, while it is associated with a higher rate of complications and immediate local ablation failures. CT-RFA in patients with HCC, however, is associated with a lower complication rates. L-RFA should be used in most patients with CRLM, but selectively utilize L-RFA in healthier patients with HCC. We classified those macroscopic configuration and the characteristic. Long-term survival was calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method, and differences in group of survivors were compared by the log-rank test. RESULT: 43 cases of protruding lesion and 10 cases of wall thickness and flat invasive lesion (WT) were defined. The protruding lesions were classified into 3 subclass, such as pedicle type (PD, n = 7), nodular type (ND, n = 25) and papillary type (PP, n = 11). ND and PP were sessile lesions. Particularly, the cancer nest was localized in the basal point with PD. On the other hand, the size of cancer spread in ND, PP, WT were 5.8?}3.5? $ 4.0?}2.0, 4.8?}2.8? $ 4.0?}1.9, 5.6?}2.6? $ 5.1?}2.6 (cm), respectively. These sizes of spreading part were 3 to 6 times of the protruding part. The frequency of case beyond pT2 cancer was 0% (PD), 91% (ND), 82.8% (PP), 90% (WT). Patients with pT1 tumor who underwent no additional surgery, are alive without recurrence. In patients with pT2 cancer, the 5-year survival rate was 52.6%. Furthermore, those with pT3 lesions had poor prognoses (MST; 12 months). CONCLUSION: Also the regional lymphadenectomy is necessary for the cases of pT2 cancer. There is much frequency of advanced cancer with sessile lesion and flat lesion. However, all cases with macroscopic pedicle type were pT1 cancer. Thus, the case with pedicle lesion is optimal for the laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Introduction: Prevention and treatment of secondary pancreatic infection is currently the main goal of treatment for acute necrotizing pancreatitis. The colon has been considered a major source of bacteria causing infection of pancreatic necrosis in acute pancreatitis. Our aim is to study the role of near total colectomy in reducing bacterial translocation and infection of pancreatic necrosis. Methods and procedures; 42 Spraque-Dawley rats were used in this study. Pancreatic ductal infusion of 1 ml/kg Na-taurocholic acid was used for experimental pancreatitis. Study design was as follows; group-1; underwent laparotomy and ductal infusion of saline (control), group-2; laparotomy and ductal Na-taurocholic acid, group-3; near total colectomy and ductal saline, group-4; near total colectomy and Na-taurocholic acid. All animals were sacrificed at 48 hours, and tissue samples were collected from mesenteric lymph nodes, pancreas, spleen, liver and peritoneum for bacteriologic cultures. Additionally, blood and small bowel cultures were also prepared. Results; In group-4, small bowel bacterial overgrowth with gram-negatives microorganism such as E.coli, Proteus mirabilis and Enterococcus was observed. Bacterial count of gramnegative rods in the small intestine and pancreatic tissue were also significantly higher in group-4 than group-2 (p = <0,001 for small bowel, p = 0,002 for pancreas). Small bowel bacterial overgrowth statistically correlated with pancreatic infection in group-4 (r = 0,836, p = 0.001). Morphology of the small bowel showed significant changes such as loss of villus length and altered microvasculature in both group-2 and group-4 compared to controls. Conclusion; In contrast of general believe claiming colonic microflora is a potential source of pancreatic infection in acute pancreatitis, the results of this study showed that small bowel plays important role in pancreatic tissue infection on the course of acute pancreatitis via bacterial overgrowth and mucosal morphological changes of small bowel. Objective: To present a case report of a 2 year old female diagnosed with biliary ascariasis and was managed by laparoscopy and endoscopy. This is a case of a 2 year old female who presented with abdominal pain, fever and jaundice. On abdominal ultrasound, there was tubular echogenic structures at the common bile duct. Working diagnosis was biliary ascariasis. Patient was scheduled for laparoscopy. Intraoperative cholangiogram revealed ascaris bolus on the common bile duct. Choledochotomy was performed and manual extraction of 16 adult ascaris was done. This was followed by cholangioscopy and clearing of ascaris carcass using biopsy forceps. This was followed by primary repair of the common bile duct and cholecystectomy. Conclusion: Biliary ascariasis on a 2 year old can be managed safely by using laparoscopy and endoscopy. Introduction: In an attempt to reduce the incidence of development of pancreatic insufficiency following subtotal pancreatectomy, lesser procedures (central pancreatectomy, enucleation) are advocated for selected patients. Enucleation of pancreatic tumors carries the risk of pancreatic duct leakage or inadequate resection. We have performed laparoscopic enucleation of pancreatic tumors in selected patients since 1992. We present the feasibility and short term outcomes of this approach. Methods: Since 1992, 28 patients have undergone enucleation of pancreatic tumors at our institution. Laparoscopic enucleation was attempted in 19 patients. We retrospectively reviewed the demographic features, operative indications, conversion rate, operative time, blood loss, average length of stay, postoperative complications and mortality rate. Results: Laparoscopic enucleation was attempted in 19 patients. There were 13 females and 6 males. The mean age was 56 yr (range, 34-74 yr). The average BMI was 24.6 (range, 18. 4-34.4) . The indications for surgery were neuroendocrine tumor (6), IPMN (4), pancreatic cyst (6), and metastasis from renal cell carcinoma (3). The locations of the tumors were head and uncinate process (9), neck (6) and body (4) .Three patients were converted to an open operation (15%) because of inability to identify the lesion (1), posterior location of the tumor (1), and intra operative discovery of liver lesions with metastatic characteristics during intra operative ultrasound (1). One patient underwent concomitant right hepatectomy [for liver metastasis ]; another patient underwent esophagectomy [for esophageal carcinoma]. The mean operative time was 193 min (range, 60-450 min). The mean blood loss was 72.5 ml (range 0-500 ml). None of the patients required intraoperative transfusion. The average length of stay was 23 days (range, 4-64 days). The overall complication rate was 57% (pancreatic fistula in 3, pleural effusion in 1, biliary leakage in 2, intraabdominal bleeding in 3, and intra-abdominal collections in 2). Patients with bleeding needed re-exploration. Biliary and pancreatic leaks were managed successfully by non-operative means. There were no deaths. Conclusions: Laparoscopic pancreatic enucleation is feasible in selected patients with complication rates that compare favorably with equivalent open techniques. Disruption of biliary or pancreatic duct can be managed by conservative methods in the majority of patients. Long term outcome of laparoscopic pancreatic enucleation requires further study. Background: Since 1993, our group has been doing Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy (LC) using a three-port approach with excellent results. Many papers showed that Needlescopic and two or three 5 mm ports approaches may reduce the postoperative pain, but did not gained popularity. Aim: Describe a variant three-port approach with excellent cosmetic results without losing the benefits and security of conventional LC. Methods: We operated 20 consecutive patients (14 women, 6 men) with a 3 port approach -1) umbilicus -5 or 10 mm work channel; 2) sub costal -3 mm grasper and 3) right from the pubis -10 mm(0o scope). There are 3 grade I obese patients and 1 patient with a previous open gastrectomy. Results: Mean operative time was 50 minutes, there were no conversions and we did not observe any complications. Postoperative pain and return to normal activities were similar to our previous experience. Discussion: NOTES still an experimental procedure and the potential complications due to an opening in the stomach may not compensate the scar less surgery. Our technique is very similar to a conventional LC, but offers the possibility of better cosmetic results without an increase in complications. It also facilitates the procedure for the patient with a previous gastrectomy, because we entered the abdominal cavity out from the scar adhesions. Obesity is not a contra indication for our method. Conclusion: To improve cosmetic results of laparoscopic cholecystectomy it is not necessary to create a gastrotomy in the stomach. Our technique proved to be very secure and with excellent cosmetic results. It also can be adopted in almost any patient, independent of weight, sex and previous abdominal surgery. Objective of the Study: Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) remains one of the most frequent surgical therapies for symptomatic gallstone disorders. Although associated with several comorbidities, LC became widely accepted even in the elderly. The aim of this study was to determine factors affecting the operative time of LC. Methods and Procedures: Patient data were retrospectively analysed from a computer database. From April 2004 to November 2007 a total number of 596 patients were included and divided in two groups (Group I: &#8804;65 years, Group II > 65 years). Indications for LC were benign chronic or acute symptoms of gallbladder disorders. An evaluation sheet was developed for systematic review. Age, gender, BMI, ASA-score, preoperative ERCP, operative indications, and surgeon's experience were evaluated. Univariate and multivariate statistical analysis was performed. Results: The mean (± SD) age of the 596 patients was 52.2 ± 16.7 years (range, 16-89 years). Median operative time in Group I patients (n = 425) was 80.0 min (range, 57.0-106.5 min) and in Group II patients (n = 171) 80.0 min (range, 56.0-116.5 min). Comparing the logarithmic means of the operative time for LC of different age groups, the difference was statistically not significant. Overall, univariate and multivariate analysis showed male gender, obesity, acute cholecystitis, previous upper abdominal surgery and surgeon's experience to be statistically significant predictors for long operative time for LC. Comparing median operative time for LC performed by laparoscopic and none-laparoscopic specialists, significant shorter operative time was found for the laparoscopic specialist group. Rate of intraoperative complications was 1%. Considering acute cholecystitis only, the rate was 1.9%. Postoperative complication rate was 3.5%, and 5.7% for acute cholecystitis alone. Conclusions: Operative time for LC was not prolonged in the elderly. But several predictors for prolonged operative time may identify high risk patients requiring additional anesthesia care. Structured training programs, but also patient's selection should minimize the risk of prolonged surgical intervention and associated complications. Introduction: Early diagnosis and treatment of intraabdominal illness is a challenge in the ICU patient and any delay may have devastating consequences. The aim of this study is to study the role of laparoscopy as a therapeutic tool in the ICU. There are a few studies in the literature describing laparoscopy as a diagnostic tool, but there is only one study describing a single case where laparoscopy was used as a therapeutic tool. We describe our experience with the use of bedside laparoscopy as a therapeutic tool in ICU patients with intraabdominal illness. Methods and Procedures: During a 24 month period, 13 patients (mean age 69 years), intubated and mechanically ventilated, underwent a therapeutic laparoscopy procedure in the ICU. In these patients diagnostic laparoscopy was performed initially and was subsequently converted to a therapeutic laparoscopic procedure at the bedside. Hemodynamic parameters (central venous pressure [CVP] , mean arterial pressure [MAP]), ABGs, and respiratory parameters were monitored throughout the entire laparoscopic procedure. These patients were heavily sedated and required hemodynamic support. The ASA, APACHE, and SOFA were documented on the day of the procedure. Results: Of the 13 patients who underwent a therapeutic laparoscopy procedure at the bedside, 8 patients had gallbladder related disease (5 acalculous cholecystitis, 2 empyema, 1 gangrene of the fundus). Six of these patients went on to have a therapeutic procedure at the bedside in the ICU (5 patients had a laparoscopic cholecystectomy and 1 patient a laparoscopic cholecystostomy). Of the remaining 5 patients, 2 patient was found to have a cirrhotic liver with intraabdominal ascites and drains were placed. Periappendyceal inflammation (Plastron) was found in one patient and the abdomen was irrigated and drains placed. Bile leakage from the cystic stump was found in another patient who was admitted after a cumbersome cholecystectomy, clips were applied, drains placed, and the abdomen irrigated. The last patient was found to have murky fluid intraabdominally and on further inspection, a perforation of the antrum was noted. The perforation was sutured with an omental patch and the abdomen copiously irrigated. Of all the parameters recorded during this study only the central venous pressure during laparoscopy was higher and this was statistically significant (p < 0.05). Five patients in this study succumbed despite intensive medical therapy. Post mortem exam was performed in 3 patients; in the remaining 2 patients, post mortem was unobtainable because of lack of consent from the relatives. The clinical course and post mortem exam suggested that the cause of death was unrelated to any intraabdominal process or the laparoscopic procedure. Conclusions: The present study shows that the laparoscopy in the ICU has potential as a therapeutic tool. The complications that were observed during laparoscopy were of minor importance and did not influence the morbidity and mortality. We believe that laparoscopy is an accurate and time efficient bedside therapeutic tool that can be performed safely in certain critically ill patients who are too ill and unstable to be transported to the operating room. A greater effort should be made to incorporate laparoscopy as a therapeutic tool in the ICU. Introduction: In difficult cases involving the gallbladder, the use of intraoperative cholangiography has been shown to be beneficial. The inflammatory reaction that is associated with empyema of the gallbladder is frequently quite severe making laparoscopic cholecystectomy difficult. We present our experience with intraoperative cholangiography in cases which presented with empyema of the gallbladder. Methods and Procedures: We reviewed 16 patients (11 male, 5 female) with a mean age of 64 y.o. who presented with empyema of the gallbladder who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy with the use of intraoperative cholangiography. Both medical and surgical records were used to collect pre-operative, intra-operative and post-operative data from these 16 patients who were successfully treated by laparoscopy. Intraoperative findings, cholangiography findings, as well as hospital stay were all recorded. Results: The average duration of the laparoscopic intervention was 122 minutes (80-220 minutes). Laparoscopic cholangiography was successful and defined the gallbladder anatomy in all 16 patients. Anatomic anomalies were found in 3 (18.8%) patients and 1 (6.2%) patient had an inadvertent common bile duct injury which was successfully treated intraoperatively. Choledocholithiasis was ruled out in 12 patients (75%) and confirmed in 4 (25%) with clinically suspected lithiasis. The average time for intraoperative cholangiography was 18 minutes (11-25 minutes) . Median blood loss was quantified as 70 ml (28-97). The median length of hospital stay was 4 days. There were no complications associated with the intraoperative cholangiography procedure. Conclusions: ? he use of intraoperative cholangiography is useful in difficult laparoscopic cases involving the gallbladder. Patients presenting with severe inflammation or empyema of the gallbladder should undergo intraoperative cholangiography routinely. It is an inexpensive procedure that is not time consuming and the information obtained is very useful in visualizing the biliary anatomy. It is a safe procedure with negligible risks. Background: Laparoscopic formal right hepatectomy remains a technical challenge. We propose that the procedure can be accomplished efficiently with standard laparoscopic techniques, in ordered sequence, using smaller incisions, and having identical outcomes as the open procedure. Method: We reviewed 25 consecutive video recordings of formal laparoscopic right hepatectomy performed over a 4 month period. Instruments include 3 -4 trocars, and a wound protector-hand port (Gelport). Bipolar (Ligasure) and monopolar cautery, and ultrasonic shears are the primary energy sources. Instruments consist of atraumatic graspers and fine-tip dissectors. The 30-and 45-degree angled videoscope are used. Hepatic vessels are ligated with grey-load endoscopic staplers and white-load staplers are used for liver parenchyma. The technique is parceled into five sequences: (1) hilar dissection to divide cystic duct/artery, right hepatic artery, right portal vein, (2) release ligamentous attachments laterally and superiorly, (3) divide retro-hepatic veins to IVC, (4) isolate/ligate right hepatic vein, (5) divide liver parenchyma. All staplers and sutures are pre-loaded. Results: In all cases of formal right hepatectomy, we have consistently adopted this approach and sequence of dissection for efficiency and teaching. Each case requires two surgeons and total operative times range from 120 ? 150 mins (average time requirements for the five major sequences are: hilar dissection 20 mins, attachments 10 mins, retrohepatic veins 15 mins, right HV 10 mins, parenchyma 10 mins). Typically, 4 greyload staplers and 5 white-load staplers are used in a case, depending on the size of the liver. The liver lobe and gallbladder are removed through a 7 cm protected midline incision. Conclusions: Efficiency of laparoscopic-assisted formal right hepatectomy with vascular isolation can be enhanced with a consistent approach and sequence. We advocate deconstructing this major operation into smaller parcels for instructional purposes, which also enables the team to prepare and anticipate requirements for each sequence. LDPS were performed at our institution and compared retrospectivele. Enrolled periods were divided to four eras chronologically by 11 months respectively. Results: Demographics including patient?s age, gender, BMI were not different between the two groups. Final pathologic diagnosis was diverse including cystic tumor, SPT, IPMN, cancer, neuroendocrine tumor etc and was also not different between the two groups. Tumor location, operative time, tumor size, perioperative transfusion, hospital stay and postoperative complication was not different between two groups, but interestingly pancreatic stump leakage rate was significantly higher in LDPS group.(3.8% VS 11.9%, p = 0.038) Mean operative time was gradually shortened by eras (Era 1: 236.3, Era 2: 223.6, Era 3: 192.4, Era 4: 185.4 ) and proportion of SPLDP was increased by eras from 1.9%, 5.8%, 38.5% and 53.8% respectively. Conclusions: SPLDP might be technically more difficult than LDPS, especially in initial stage of laparoscopic pancreatic surgery. After overcoming learning curve, SPLDP can be perfomed safely and possilbly within shorter time. SPLDP should be tried firstly to give maximal benefits of minimal invasive surgery to patients, whenever possible. In the UK a new device called LOTUS? (SRA Developments Ltd, Devon, UK) has been developed, using a torsional mode of ultrasonic vibration. Aim: As the largest centre for laparoscopic liver surgery in the UK, we report our series of five years experience of LLRs and during the presentation will show edited video footage to illustrate the efficacy of torsional ultrasound in LLRs. Patients and methods: Since January 2004 to August 2008, 103 LLRs were performed in our Unit. Torsional ultrasound was the main dissector used in 63 cases. (5 major hepatectomies (MH), 35 left lateral secienectomies, 10 bisegmentectomies, and 13 segmentectomies) and was one of the principle instruments used in 20 cases (15 MH and 5 LLS). Median blood loss was 250 ml (50-600). Mean operating time was 180mins (120-242.5) and median hospital stay was 3 days (2-4). There were two major complications, one bile leak and one haemorrhage requiring return to theatre and nine minor complications. Conclusions: Advancements in surgical equipment have contributed significantly to a safe and efficient expansion of LLRs. A reliable ultrasonic dissector is essential in this type of surgery and the torsional mode of ultrasonic vibration has been shown to be an excellent instrument for dissecting liver parenchyma haemostatically. Objective of the study: Primary intrahepatic bile duct dilatation (IHBD) may present as a localized form, in which resection of the affected liver can prevent immediate and late complications. Laparoscopy has gained large interest in liver surgery. It also allows a safe and efficient exploration of the common bile duct. We present here our results concerning the feasibility and safety of anatomical laparoscopic liver resection for localized IHBD. Methods and procedures: We performed 10 laparoscopic liver resections for localized IHBD, on seven women and three men (mean age: 47 ± 5 years). Resections were: two right hepatectomies, three left hepatectomies and five left lateral sectionectomies. Three patients had associated common bile duct stones which were treated through perioperative cholangioscopy. The data collected included: age, sex, localization of disease, type of liver resection, duration of surgery, blood loss, perioperative transfusions, conversion to open surgery, postoperative complications, and length of hospital stay. Values were expressed as means ± SEM. Results: Mean operative time was 303.9 ± 36 min. Mean blood loss was 217.5 ± 84 ml. None of these patients required hand assistance or conversion to open surgery. One patient suffered a residual collection which was drained percutaneously. Postoperative course was uneventful in the other patients. Mean hospital stay was 5.3 ± 0.8 days. No recurrence of cholangitis was observed after a mean follow-up of 45.6 months. Conclusions based on the results: The laparoscopic treatment of IHBD combines two specialized procedures requiring knowledge and technical skill in both hepatobiliary surgery and laparoscopy. This procedure is safe and should be performed by teams with expertise in these two areas of surgery. Introduction: Laparoscopic surgery has been gaining wide acceptance currently especially in distal pancreatectomy, but few study has been reported about laparoscopic central pancreatectomy (LCP) for pancreatic body lesions. So, we herein report our evolving experiences of LCP. Methods: From Sept 2007 to June 2008, 6 cases of LCP were performed for pancreatic body lesion at our institution. Patient?s position was supine and camera port was inserted in supraumbilical area and 12 mm working port in left paramedian area, another 5 mm port in RUQ area for operator and 5 mm assistant?s port at LUQ respectively. Pancreatic body lesions were dissected and transected proximally and distally using Endo-GIA. For initial 5 patients, the specimen was retrieved through midline mini-laparotomy incision (6 cm) and through the incision mucosa to mucosa pancreaticojejunostomy (PJ) after focal removal of staples around main duct at distal segment and following end to side jejunojejunostomy was done by open method. For last patient, duct to mucosa PJ and jejunojejunostomy was performed by totally intracorporeal suture technique. Two closed suction drains were remained. Results) Final diagnosis was 4 cystic tumor, 1 IPMN and 1 neuroendocrine tumor. All the cases had negative resection margins. Mean operation time was 430 minute (393-444).There was no PJ site leakage, but in two patients mild pancreatic juice leak was developed at the proximal pancreatic stump, which was stopped within postoperative 2 weeks with conservative treatment. No surgical complications except postoperative gastrointestinal bleeding requiring distal pancreatectomy in 1 patient were reported. Mean postoperative hospital stay was 15.5 days and they are all doing well now. Conclusions: LCP is technically feasible and could give benefits of preserving pancreas parenchyma and of minimal invasive surgery to patients. But it might be technically challenging and cause higher rate of pancreatic fistula from dual stump sites, so this procedure should be chosen in appropriately selected patients. INTRODUCTION: For the surgical treatment of gallbladders diseases, the laparoscopic cholecystectomy has been accepted as the gold standard all over the world. Although, it seems to be clear that the needlescopic procedure, called minilaparoscopic cholecystectomy (MLC) is superior in many aspects when it is compared not only to open surgery, but also compared to the conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy (CLC). OBJECTIVE: Evaluate the hospital costs of these procedures and specify the differences concerning the two surgical techniques and it is implication in the whole cost of the procedure. METHOD: Comparative and retrospective cost study, with 40 consecutive patients, who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a private hospital in Recife, Brazil. There were two groups with 20 patients each. One group was submitted to conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy (10-10-5-5 mm with clips) and in the other the needlescopic approach was performed (10-3-2-2 mm clipless). MLC Technique: Two trocars of 2-mm, one of 3-mm and one of 10-mm at the umbilical site for the laparoscope are inserted. 3-mm laparoscope, clips, or endobags were not used. The cystic artery was sealed by electrocautery near the neck of the gallbladder and the cystic duct was sealed using surgical knots. Gallbladder removal was carried out through the umbilical site with a glove wrist. All surgeries were performed between July 2006 and December 2007 and some aspects concerning individual differences were standard for all patients. Only the hospital costs were considered in this study and arithmetical medium was reached in the two groups to compare the whole procedures costs. RESULTS: The MLC procedures showed no significant difference in the total hospital costs compared to the CLC approach. While US$ 1.440 were spent in the minilaparoscopic technique, the conventional laparoscopic surgery demands US$ 1.500 for the whole procedure. CONCLUSION: The equivalence of hospital costs on both procedures suggests the MLC should be more used by surgeons. When available, MLC, a procedure with almost invisible scars for the same cost of a CLC, should be offered as an option for the patient. Objective: A minimally invasive approach to hepatobiliary reconstruction can be technically difficult due to the need to suture a fine structure in an enclosed space, intimately related to critical vascular structures, often with significant adhesions or fibrosis. Using the da Vinci surgical system can aid in visualization and maneuverability, facilitating the dissection and anastomosis in this area. We examined our shortterm outcomes with robot-assisted laparoscopic Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction. Methods: We attempted a minimally invasive approach to biliary reconstruction in 8 patients from June 2007 to August 2008. Data from patients undergoing a minimally invasive approach to roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy were prospectively entered into a database, and patient characteristics, indications, operative data, and perioperative outcomes were recorded and analyzed retrospectively. 8 patients were explored laparoscopically with the intention of a minimally invasive biliary reconstruction. One patient underwent conversion to an open operation due to massive adhesions. The remaining 7 successfully underwent a robot-assisted laparoscopic roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy. The mean age of the patients was 58 (range 20-82); there were 5 males and 3 females. Results: Indications for reconstruction included 3 benign common bile duct strictures from pancreatitis, 1 idiopathic benign stricture, 1 previous roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy reconstruction, 1 retained common bile duct stone after ERCP-related duodenal injury, 1 obstruction from pancreatic cancer, and 1 common bile duct injury after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Mean operative time was 353 minutes (range 160-510); average estimated blood loss was 70 ml (range 5 to 130 ml). 6 of 8 patients had undergone preoperative biliary decompression. Size of the common hepatic duct ranged from 3 mm to 18 mm. Mean preoperative bilirubin was 1.9; all patients had a normal bilirubin by postoperative day 2. Average length of hospital stay was 4.9 days. There was no postoperative morbidity or mortality. No patients required a blood transfusion. One patient was readmitted for a short stay on postoperative day 3 for dehydration after being discharged on postoperative day 1. Conclusion: A minimally invasive approach to complex biliary reconstructive operations is feasible and can be facilitated with the use of the da Vinci surgical system. The robotic camera provides a stable, magnified view of the operative field, and the Endowrist technology aids in the dissection and suturing of the delicate structures in the hepatic hilum. In addition, the fourth robotic arm is an invaluable tool in achieving extreme, stable retraction of the liver for exposure of the hilum. The Single Port Access (SPATM) technique utilizes the umbilicus as a single portal of entry into the abdominal cavity. The goal of this access technique is to maintain the current, safe dissection of standard multiport laparoscopic cholecystectomy while performing the entire operation through one incision concealed within the umbilicus. The critical view is a proven paradigm of safe dissection of the cystic duct during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. In May 2007 we performed our first SPA cholecystectomy at Drexel University. Initially, two articulating or one articulating and one rigid instrument were used for retraction and dissection. Over the first year of experience we introduced a third instrument, a rigid grasper for fundal retraction, and began using all rigid instrumentation. We present a comparison of 10 two instrument SPA cholecystectomies to 10 three instrument SPA cholecystectomies. Data was collected from 10 consecutive two instrument and 10 consecutive three instrument SPA cholecystectomies. Articulating instruments were used for the two instrument group. Standard rigid instruments were used for the three instrument group. All procedures in both groups were performed through a 1.8 cm or less umbilical incision. Operative times were extended in the two instrument group. In the two instrument group retraction was more difficult to maintain. In one patient an additional subxyphoid port was required. The three instrument group provided optimal fundal retraction and infundibular manipulation independent of one another. This allowed the primary surgeon to manipulate and dissect the infundibulum and the cystic duct with two hands. Further, the additional retraction clearly allowed more optimal exposure of the Results. 20 patients with 38 liver lesions received ablation of each lesion with either 915 MHz or 2.45 GHz. The power used for each system was the same for all lesions, 45 W for the 915 MHz system and 100 W for the 2.45 GHz system. For the 915 MHZ system the average primary liver lesion was 3.1 cm (range 1.6 to 7) and the average treatment time was 9.5 min (range 5-10). For non primary lesions the average size was 2.1 cm (range 0.5-5) and treatment time 9.1 min (range 5-10). For the 2.45 GHz system the average primary liver lesion was 2.7 cm (range 0.8 to 6.5) and the average treatment time was 4.25 min (range 3-6). For non primary lesions the average size was 2.2 cm (range 0.5-6) and treatment time 4.5 min (range 2-8). For the 915 MHz system treatment time averaged 3.1 min/cm primary tumor and 4.3 min/cm non primary tumor. For the 2.45 GHz system treatment time averaged 1.6 min/cm primary tumor and 2.1 min/cm non primary tumor. 15 patients (5/11 treated with 2.45 GHz) have had follow up CT and none of those had evidence of residual disease. Complications were a liver abscess in a patient treated with 2.45 GHz and a biloma in the 915 MHz. Conclusions: As this is a preliminary report a large enough sample size to determine significance has not been obtained. It appears, however, that the data is leaning towards significance in demonstrating the treatment time and number of applications required to treat a liver tumor of a given size and type are less for the 2.45 GHz system than the 915 MHz system. Efficacy and complication rates appear to be similar. This study will continue to evaluate the 2. Methods: As opposed to conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomies using four access ports, we perform the Single Incision Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy (procedure termed SILC) using a 5 mm flexible laparoscope, endo-roticulating instruments and 5 mm endo-clips. A vertical incision is made at an everted umbilicus for an average length of 2.5 cm. 3 trocars (5 mm each) are inserted through this incision for the dissection. A 2-0 silk suture on a Keith needle is passed at the upper border of the 11th rib at the mid-clavicular line and placed through the fundus of the gallbladder. This is used for gallbladder retraction. Dissection is performed with endo-roticulating instruments. Usual steps of laparoscopic cholecystectomy are followed including obtaining critical view. At the end of the procedure, one of the 5 mm trocars is exchanged for a 10 mm trocar through which an endocatch is introduced for removal of the gallbladder. The fascia is closed with absorbable sutures and umbilicus is reconstructed. Results: We have performed 28 cases. Average operative time was 64.5 min (range 37 to 90 min). Average length of stay was less than 24 hrs. 2 cases needed conversion to 3 ports (7.1%) to obtain critical view. Two morbidities were encountered: one surgical site infection requiring antibiotic treatment and one cystic duct stump leak requiring ERCP and drainage. There were no conversions to open, no CBD injury, and no mortality. Conclusion: SILC appears to be a promising alternative to conventional laparoscopic cholecystectomy with acceptable morbidity and mortality. With advancements in surgical instrumentation this procedure will continue to evolve. These guidelines include 11 audit criteria, which allow individual units to appraise their performance, and allow for national comparison. The aim of the study was to assess the adherence of BSG guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis. Methods: Sixty five case records of the patients admitted with acute pancreatitis over two years period were studied. Of the 11 audit criteria produced by the BSG 6 were determined to be acceptable to use during this study. Results: Diagnosis was made in 96% of patients within 48hrs. Etiology could be identified in 65% of cases compared to the standard of 75-80%. Severity stratification was completely done in 8% of the patients which was well below 100% standard. 58% of patients had radiological investigation performed within 48hrs. Mortality was lower compared to audit standard. Definitive management plans within 2 weeks were formulated in only 28% of patients. Conclusion: This study concluded that despite low mortality, management of acute pancreatitis was significantly below evidence based standards. Current practice requires review and modification as required. Once in place repetition of this study would be useful to assess success of their implementation Introduction : With the progress of gastrofiberscopy, the endoscopic sphincterotomy have been performed as a standard therapy for CBD stones. But in the recent studies, the primary laparoscopic CBD exploration is superior or not inferior than endoscopic sphincterotomy in the clearance rate and morbidity rate. And also, there have been many studies about the advantages of laparoscopic CBD exploration in hospital stay and the costs. The authors analyzed of the 79 patients undertaken laparoscopic CBD exploration and evaluated the clinical significance. Patients and method : We retrospectively analyzed 79 patients undertaken laparoscopic CBD exploration at the department of surgery in Konyang university hospital between March 2001 and May 2008. All patients were in failure of endoscopic removal of stones or size of stones ??s 1 cm or multiple CBD stones. The four port technique was performed in all patients. The stones were removed by 1 $ 1.5 cm sized incision in CBD, then we confirmed the remnant stone in CBD and intrahepatic duct (IHD) using choledochoscope. After the operation, we performed four biliary drainage method. Each of them was T-tube drainage, endobiliary stent, endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD) and percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD). Results : Of the 79 patients, male were 36(45%) and female were 43 (55%) and mean age was 66 years (18 $ 90). 29 cases (37%) were trying the endoscopic biliary stone removal before the operation. The mean operation time was 128 minutes. Patients had T-tube drainages (4 cases), internal biliary stent (21 cases), ENBD (18 cases) and PTBD (36 cases). On the average, the diet was started 2.5 days after the operation, and the mean length hospital day was 11 days (3 $ 30). Convertion to the laparotomy was performed at 2 cases, one was because of the difficulty of complete removal of stones and the other one was because of bleeding by intrahepatic vessel injury (S5). At 6 of 21, endobiliary stent were not extracted spontaneously on follow-up simple abdomen X-ray at 4 weeks later, so endoscopic removal was performed for them. Patients with ENBD or PTBD discharged after removal of ENBD or PTBD and there was no mortality. There were 4 cases of complications, subhepatic seroma (2 cases) and bile leakage (2 cases). All of them with complication were recovered with conservative treatment. 1 case of all the 79 pateints was found the remnant stone 1 weeks later after the operation and the stone removed by endoscopic sphincterotomy. CBD stones were recurred in 3 cases of all the patient and removed by re-laparoscopic CBD exploration. Conclusions : On the treatment of CBD stone, it is generally perfomed to laparoscopic cholecystectomy after CBD stone removal using endoscopy sphincterotomy. But it is need to choice treatement stratege considering hospital stay and the costs. And also, laparoscopic CBD exploration could be performed as the primary treatment in the poor cooperated patients, multiple CBD stones, large sized stones. Backgrounds and Purposes; Recently, the laparoscopic resection on solid organs is performed in standard operation style with the improvement of the laparoscopic instrument and the developing operation technique. Still, it is not easy to perform liver exploration by using the laparoscope. Because there are still other problems, such as the styptic matter against bleeding, difficulty of the operation technique, insufficient instrument, room and visual field for surgery. As a result, laparoscope operation has limited disease for which medicine is efficacious on some part of it. For this reason, we have studied that liver resection treat by using laparoscope will be the safe and efficient remedy for the patients who suffer from liver cancer spreaded from hepatolithiasis and HCC (hepatocellularcarcinoma), colon cancer. Objects and Methods; We researched 32 people: 20 patients with IHD stone, 4 with HCC (hepatocellularcarcinoma), 1 with cholangiocarcinoma, 7 patients who had colon cancer spread to liver. By using retrospective method, these patients are observed on the clinical history, ways of surgery, time for the operation, hospital day, and complication. Results; The target age range was from 37 to 80 and the average was 61 years old. People aged over 60 was around 62.5%. The spread of men and women was 16 against 16. According to their medical history, 9 patients had experiences for upper abdominal operation. There were 4 patients with three S3 and one for S6, both of them had had HCC (hepatocellularcarcinoma). When it comes to the seven patients, who had colon cancer and spreaded to liver, there were 2 for S3, 4 for S4 and 1 for S7&8. In a operation, 4 to 5 ports were used. And there were 8 cases of Lt. lateral sectionectomy(25%), another 9 cases for Lt. hepatectomy(28,1%) of Lt. hepatolithiasis. 2 cases among the 11 cases of wedge resection of liver, were HCC and 7 cases (2 for S3, 4 for S4, 1 for S7&8)were who had colon cancer with liver metastasis. Lt. lateral sectionectomy was performed for 2 cases of HCC and 1 cases of cholangiocarcinoma were had Lt. hepatectomy. The average period of the operation was 335 minutes, bleeding amount was 404 cc and the average period in hospitality was 14 days. There were 2 cases of bile leak on the part from hepatic resection complication, 1 case of intrabdominal abscess, 1 with acute renal failure after surgery, 2 with wound infection. All of cases were recuperated in hospital and there was no another surgical operation or death. There was one case remained IHD stone, which had surgical treat for hepatolithiasis. There was also a patient who had peritoneal relapse, which had surgical treat for HCC. And he was detected for in early stage. Conclusion; Hepatectomy with laparoscope have some advantages -less pain after operation, relatively small incision site, the short period of hospital day and less time for back to the routine. It is as effective as laparotomy. As the trend that, currently, considers the laparoscope treat as priority, the laparoscopic approach would be the important guideline for curing hepatolithiasis and HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) through the improving surgical instrument and the way of operation. Background: The laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) has been the standard of care for two decades. LC is usually preformed with two 10-12 mm ports and two 5 mm ports. Some investigators have looked to improve the procedure by limiting the port sizes to improve outcomes. In our Department, a single surgeon and his trainees have been performing 2 mm laparoscopic cholecystectomy (2LC) since 1996. We believe that, before attempting LC by natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), the next logical step to improving outcomes in LC, for most surgeons, is to reduce the size and number of ports, as we have by utilizing 2 mm technology. Methods: A retrospective review of a prospectively maintained database of 1309 consecutive LC patients was evaluated. Use of 2LC started in July 1996. Initially, all procedures were started with a 10 mm port and three 2 mm ports. Since 2000, all cases are started with a 10 mm port and two 2 mm ports. All procedures were preformed by a single surgeon (PRR), or a senior-level trainee. Background: The laparoscopic preperitoneal repair of inguinal hernias is an accepted and widely used approach, and several reports have demonstrated its advantages over an open repair. Incarcerated hernia is still considered an indication for an open repair, for several reasons, including the technical complexity, availability of trained laparoscopic surgeon for an emergent procedure, and the need to examine the incarcerated contents for signs of ischemia. Aim: To examine our experience with laparoscopic treatment of irreducible inguinal hernias, and present our approach which combines intra-peritoneal laparoscopic exploration, with reduction of incarcerated contents, and totally extra-peritoneal repair of the hernia. Methods: Over a period of 3 years 14 patients were operated, 9 males and 5 females. In 6 cases the incarceration was chronic, and the hernia contained fat only in four of them. The other 8 patients had acute incarceration, and the hernial sac contained bowel. Reduction of the incarcerated contents was easily achieved by standard laparoscopy in all but one case, in which an open incision was needed for reduction. The incarcerated bowel, even if was ischemic, recovered in all cases after being returned to the abdominal cavity, and there was no need for resection. After contents reduction, the peritoneal gas was evacuated, and the operation was converted to a standard totally extra-peritoneal repair (TEP), using a pre-preitoneal prolene mesh. Results: All operations were completed by a laparoscopic repair including the case in which an incision was needed to reduce omentum chronically adhered to the sac. In most cases reduction was straightforward and easy, in contrast to the difficulty in reducing the contents externally before surgery. In all cases the contents was either viable, or quickly recovered from ischemia after reduction, as observed by laparoscopy. Hospitalization was short in all cases (a day or two), and no infectious or other complications occurred. Conclusion: The combined laparoscopic approach, both intra-and extraperitoneal, allows for an adequate solution to incarceration of inguinal hernias, with taking advantage of each separate approach. The first part of the procedure enables easy reduction of the incarcerated contents, and controlling its viability. The second part enables a simple and standard repair, similar to an elective case. It should be noted that the intra-peritoneal part does not force the surgeon to continue with this approach (TAPP), and the switch to TEP turns the operation into a familiar, simple and quick procedure. Introduction: Posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernias are an uncommon problem. These defects may not be recognized initially, or may develop in a delayed fashion. Immediate and delayed repair have been described. We describe two cases of delayed laparoscopic repair of traumatic posterolateral abdominal wall hernias identified at the time of initial injury.Case 1: A 22 year-old male was involved in a MVC resulting in Grade II liver laceration, pulmonary contusions, mandible fracture, and pelvic fractures. There was a palpable right flank bulge and obvious posterolateral disruption on CT. In addition, this patient had a large degloving soft tissue injury over his right flank without evisceration. He underwent operative repair of his mandible and pelvic fractures. Since he was without evisceration or bowel compromise, definitive repair of his posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernia was delayed. The soft tissue defect was allowed to heal by secondary intention. Five months post-injury the wound had healed and he underwent elective laparoscopic repair with PTFE mesh of his posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernia. He was discharged home on post-operative day one. He has returned to full activity and work full time without restrictions at 6 months follow-up.Case 2: A 37 year-old female was involved in MVC resulting in a Grade II liver laceration, a Grade III spleen laceration, and a posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernia. She was nine days postpartum at the time of her MVC. The liver and spleen injuries were managed nonoperatively. She had no clinical or radiographic evidence of evisceration or obstruction, so definititive repair was delayed. Nine months post-injury she underwent successful elective laparoscopic repair of the posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernia using PTFE mesh and was discharged home post-operative day one. She has returned to full activities without issue at 18 months follow-up.Conclusion: Traumatic posterolateral lumbar hernias are an uncommon problem, but are a known consequence of blunt trauma. If urgent laparotomy is required and the tissue integrity is adequate, the defect should be repaired with mesh. However, if indications for urgent laparotomy are absent or the tissue integrity is poor, then expectant management and delayed repair may be the preferred algorithm. We have described two cases of posterolateral traumatic lumbar hernia resulting from blunt abdominal trauma that were managed expectantly and successfully repaired laparoscopically. Inguinal hernia repair is one of the most common procedures performed during surgical practice. New methods and materials are introduced for a better outcome for this procedure as well as a better quality of life and postoperative period. This study compares conventional Lichtenstein hernia repair with sutureless self-adhesive mesh repair in terms of operative time, postoperative pain, hospital stay, complications and cost. Conventional Lichtenstein and self-adhesive mesh repair were performed in two groups of 24 groin hernia patients. The difference in operative times between groups was statistically significant. Mean pain scores (Visual Analog Score) for the conventional Lichtenstein group was significantly higher than the self-adhesive mesh group at and after 12 hours. Although the first group required a higher dosage of analgesia, the difference was not statistically significant. There was no recurrence in either group during a mean follow-up period of 9 months. Although the cost analysis of the techniques revealed a higher operational cost for the self-adhesive repair, it is too early to talk about an overall high expense of this new material before the long term results of the material. Keeping in mind that suture fixation of the prosthetic materials is the most common cause of inguinal pain and the need for re-exploration after surgery, self-adhesive mesh repair of inguinal hernias may probably overcome this serious long term complication as the early results are very promising. Objectives: It has been reported that laparoscopic exploration shows multiple hernia defects that were not detected on physical examination. The objective of this study was to describe the superiority of laparoscopic approach in detecting occult hernia defects and the precise size of hernia defects. Methods: A total of 35 consecutive patients who underwent laparoscopic ventral hernia repair in our hospital between April 2002 and August 2008 were enrolled in this study. The numbers and the size of ventral hernia found on preoperative physical examination and computed tomography were compared to those detected after adhesiolysis during laparoscopic procedures. Data were collected prospectively. Surgical technique: The initial port was inserted at the left upper abdomen by minilaparotomy followed by the insertion of two trocars at the left lateral abdomen. After the anesthesia was induced, the size of the hernia defect was measured laparoscopicaly after the adhesiolysis. Composix E/X or Dual mesh was fashioned so that the defect was overlapped in all dimensions by 3-5 cm. Introduction: Obturator hernias (OH) are rare and difficult to diagnose. While they account for as few as 0.073% of all hernias, their mortality can be as high as 70%. OH affects women more commonly than men (ratio $ 8:1). Other risk factors are emaciation, multiparity, and chronic conditions that increase the intra-abdominal pressure such as COPD and constipation. Typically more frequent on the right side, obturator herniae carry a bilaterality incidence of 6%. The typical clinical presentation for OH is one of partial or complete small bowel obstruction. Computed tomography (CT) is the diagnostic tool of choice. Although obturator hernias have been treated with a variety of surgical techniques, few report using a laparoscopic approach. Methods: We describe a case of a 90 year-old female who presented with signs of small bowel obstruction and a CT scan demonstrating an incarcerated left obturator hernia. We performed an exploratory laparoscopy to assess bowel viability followed by a totally extraperitoneal (TEP) herniae repair with mesh. Results: After initial fluid resuscitation, the patient was taken to the operative room. Initial exploratory laparoscopy identified spontaneously reduced small bowel that was dilated, but viable. Obturator herniae were evident with puckering of peritoneum bilaterally. A pre-peritoneal space was generated and two 5 mm ports were placed in the midline. Further dissection revealed bilateral obturator, left femoral, and right indirect inguinal herniae. Two separate Prolene mesh (6 · 4 inches) were fashioned and inserted to cover all defects in a standard totally extraperitoneal repair (TEP). The patient recovered well from the procedure and met criteria for dismissal in the postoperative day 2. She remains well in follow-up. Conclusion: A 90 year old female with a small bowel obstruction related to an incarcerated obturator hernia was treated effectively with a laparoscopic approach. Her TEP repair highlights the advantage of this technique for bilateral defects, finding additional herniae, evaluating bowel viability, and generating another long lasting option to treat these unusual defects. Background. Chronic pain after inguinal hernia repair is often due to nerve injury by penetrating mesh fixation devices, such as staples, tacks or sutures. The cumulative incidence of pain, numbness and discomfort after surgery for inguinal hernia is reported to be as high as 30%. Tissue sealants have been proposed to provide atraumatic mesh fixation until fibrous incorporation of the implant into the abdominal wall occurs. In several studies on hernioplasty, punctual mesh fixation with fibrin sealant (FS) proved to be efficient in terms of fixation strength and elasticity, but seroma formation was reported in certain cases as a relevant potential side effect. Bearing these critical aspect in mind, a new laparoscopic spray system (LSS) was used, which produces a thin uniform layer of FS providing broad area coverage of the mesh achieving a transporous fixation with a high tensile strength. Aims of the study were to examine the reliability, safety and handling of LSS. The possible reduction of the amount of FS by the use of the LSS was another objective of this study. Methods. After informed written consent was obtained, transabdominal preperitoneal hernioplasty (TAPP) was performed in 33 primary inguinal hernias in 27 non-selected consecutive patients by a single surgeon. A macroporous mesh (TI-Mesh?, GfE, Germany) was fixed with 1 ml of fibrin sealant (Tisseel? = Tissucol?, Baxter Bioscience, Austria) The FS was applied using a dedicated spray catheter with special safety features insertable through a 5 millimeter trocar and attached to a carbon dioxide regulating device. Results. The intra operative handling was satisfactory. The mean operation time of 60.3 minutes (± 15.4) was comparable to staple fixation and punctual FS application in TAPP. The formation of a thin layer of FS led to a 50% reduction in the amount used FS compared to punctual application. Conclusions: This LSS provides an atraumatic broad elastic fixation of mesh in the TAPPhernioplasty, allowing an easy and excellent fixation accompanied by a reduction of the amount of FS required. It could therefore help to simplifly application and to reduce costs also compared to mechanical fixation and avoid potential seroma formation as described for punctual FS application. Key words. Laparoscopic Combining one type of mesh with different sAB (providing a barrier between implant and viscera until the mesh is covered by neomesothelium) formed the rationale to conduct this study and ruled out a possible impact of different mesh materials. sAB were fixed to the mesh in a new atraumatic way by the use of fibrin sealant (FS). Methods: 32 rats were operated in open IPOM technique (n = 8 per group). One mesh per animal (2 · 2 cm) was fixed with 4 non-resorbable sutures. An antiadhesive barrier of 2.5 · 2.5 cm was fixed with fibrin sealant (4 I.U.) to the visceral side of the implant. A macroporous polypropylene mesh was used. The antiadhesive layers tested were SurgiWrapa?, Prevadha?and Seprafilma?. All sAB are fully degradable in 2 to 8 weeks. Observation period was 30 days, mesh with sutures only served as control group. Adhesion formation, tissue integration, seroma formation, inflammation and vascularisation were evaluated. Adhesions were scored qualitatively using the Vandendael score and quantitatively by evaluating the percental adhesion-coverage of mesh surface. Histology was performed. Results: When compared to the control group prevadh group showed a significant reduction of adhesion formation verified by the Vandendael score as well as by the percentage of mesh surface covered by adhesions. Adhesion formation was significantly reduced in the Seprafilm group compared to the control group. No difference concerning adhesion formation was found between SurgiWrap and control group. No seroma formation or inflammation was detected in any group. Tissue integration of the mesh was reduced in Prevadh and Seprafilm group, SurgiWrap and control group showed full mesh integration. There is a highly positive correlation between Vandendael score and percental adhesion area of mesh surface (r = 0.7). Conclusions: In our opinion FS is an excellent agent for sAB fixation. The new method of atraumatic fixation is simple and effective. Sealed Prevadha?and Seprafilma?are potent agents for the reduction of adhesion formation. A potential relationship between effective adhesion prevention and impaired tissue integration of the implant was observed demanding further research. A poor integration of the mesh into the abdominal wall may influence mesh function. It was compared to the groups with TEP done under SA with fixation of mesh (SA-F) and TEP done under GA with non-fixation of mesh (GANF). (Table- 1) The recurrence rates, conversion rate and complications were comparable in all the three groups and similar to the rates reported for TEP and open hernia repair in the literature. The mean hospital stay, the days to resume normal activities and pain scores were significantly higher in mesh fixation (SA-F) group(1). Discussion-The procedure-TEP done under SA with non-fixation of the mesh-had all the advantages of TEP without its major disadvantages viz GA administration and need to fix the mesh. TEP under SA is a bit technically demanding. However several studies have shown that doing TEP under SA or epidural anesthesia is feasible, safe and had complications rate similar to cases done under GA. Since preperitoneal space collapses after the TEP procedure is completed, the mesh is ?sandwiched and stabilized? in the preperitoneal space even when the mesh is not fixed with any method. Several studies in the past have confirmed the safety, low recurrence rates and better results in terms of pain of the TEP procedure done with non-fixation of mesh. Objective: Dual-layer mesh products are optimal for a subset of ventral hernia repair. While small umbilical defects are easily accessed through a single incision, intraperitoneal visualization is limited and only possible prior to mesh placement. The purpose of our study was to evaluate the feasibility of a singleincision flexible endoscopic sub-rectal sheath tunneling technique to allow intraperitoneal visualization of mesh placement. Methods and Procedures: Three 25-kg female swine were anesthetized with general anesthesia and intubated. A 2 cm umbilical incision was created to mimic a standard approach for umbilical hernia repair. A dual-channel gastroscope (Storz) was introduced through this skin incision and an extraperitoneal tunnel below the rectus fascia was developed in two different locations. Needle knife cautery and endoscopic grasping forceps (Olympus) were used for dissection and to enter the peritoneal cavity. The scope was retroflexed allowing intraperitoneal visualization of the hernia site. Mesh repair was performed in usual fashion using 2-0 prolene sutures and intraperitoneal visualization confirmed mesh deployment without incident. The scope was removed and single incision closed in usual fashion. Results: The total duration of the procedure was approximately 30minutes ± 10minutes. The average length of the tunnel was 15 cm. A lateral approach was abandoned after the first procedure because of fear of bowel injury during peritoneal entry. The two following techniques employed a tunnel that entered the abdomen over the liver. Intraperitoneal visualization was performed without associated bowel injury by three surgeons of varying endoscopic experience. Conclusions: We demonstrated the feasibility of a technique that does not require further skin incisions or fascial disruption yet allows intraperitoneal visualization of mesh placed during a single incision hernia repair. Further studies will employ semi-rigid over-tubes to facilitate angulation and larger pieces of mesh employing more complicated peritoneal fixation. Background: Despite more than 15 years passing since the first description of video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for pulmonary resection, the technique has yet to gain widespread acceptance, especially in community hospitals. The majority of surgeons who routinely perform VATS resections work in academic or government institutions. The perceived complexity of the technique, inadequate instrumentation and resources, and concern regarding the potential compromise of surgical and oncologic principles may present a greater barrier to adoption of the conventional VATS technique by community-based surgeons. The objective of this study was to determine the outcomes of a hybrid technique for VATS pulmonary resection utilized by a single surgeon in a community-based practice. Methods: A series of 492 VATS pulmonary resections performed between January 2005 and March 2008 was retrospectively reviewed. All procedures were performed by a community-based, solo-practice surgeon using a hybrid VATS technique, with the routine utilization of a thoracoscopy port and a utility incision. The advantages of this dual access are ease in instrumentation, visualization, lighting, and retraction. In addition, this technique allows immediate access under direct vision for urgent control of bleeding, which can be difficult using a conventional thoracoscopic approach. ResultsThere were 264 women (54%) and 225 men (46%), with a mean age of 62.8 years (range, 14-88). 166 patients (34%) had benign lesions, and 326 (66%) had malignant lesions. Lobectomy was performed in 242 patients (49%), segmentectomy in 127 (26%), wedge resection in 58 (12%), bleb resection in 45 (9%). Pneumonectomy was performed in 14 patients (3%) and bilobectomy in 3 patients (1%).The mean operative time was 52 minutes with a median of 48 minutes. There were no conversions to conventional thoracotomy. The mean length of stay was 7 days (median 4 days). The mean length of ICU stay was 1.7 days, with 85% of patients having no days spent in the ICU. Mean duration of time with a chest tube was 4 days.There were no intraoperative deaths, however, 17 patients (3.5%) died in the perioperative period (within 30 days of surgery). Overall survival was 91.2 % over a mean follow-up of 239 days. These results compare favorably with outcomes reported for the conventional VATS approach.ConclusionsThis series shows that a hybrid VATS approach to pulmonary resection can achieve outcomes comparable to those of conventional VATS. To our knowledge, this is the largest reported series of VATS pulmonary resection from a community-based surgical practice. This hybrid VATS approach is safe and feasible and may promote an increased utilization of thoracoscopic surgery among smaller, community-based practices. (Fig. 1) . Only complication was entry into the gallbladder during dissection from the liver bed in three patients. Nine patients were discharged the same day and three the following day.Conclusion: Single incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy can be used effectively for elective removal of the gallbladder with the same length of stay, operative time, and patient?s safety as the traditional four-incision method. The technique can be taught to surgical residents maintaining reasonable operative time and low intra-operative complications. Introduction: Laparoscopic urologic surgery is generally performed using three to six ports by transperitoneal or retroperitoneal access. Recent developments regarding laparoscopic surgery have been directed toward reducing the size or number of ports to achieve the goal of minimal invasive surgery, by mini-laparoscopy, natural orifices access and transumbilical approach. In this paper we evaluated the safety and feasibility of transumbilical laparoscopic surgery using conventional laparoscopic instruments and ports. Methods and Procedures: The Veress needle was placed through the umbilicus which allowed the carbon dioxide inflow. A 10 mm trocar was placed in the periumbilical site for the 30-degree scope followed by the placement of two additional 5 mm periumbilical trocars. The entire procedure was performed using conventional laparoscopic instruments. In the end of the surgery, trocars were removed and all three periumbilical skin incisions were united for the specimen retrieval. Results: Six procedures were performed following this technique: three nephrectomies, one adrenalectomy, one ureterolithotomy and one retroperitoneal mass resection. The mean operative time and blood loss were 70.5 minutes and 108.3 cc, respectively. No intraoperative complications occurred and no patients needed blood transfusion. Analgesia was performed using dypirone (1 g IV q6 h) and ketoprofen (100 mg IV q12 h). Time to first oral intake was 8 hours. Mean hospital stay was 28 hours. Conclusions: Laparoscopic transumbilical surgery seems to be feasible and safe even using conventional laparoscopic instruments, and can be considered a potential alternative for traditional laparoscopic surgery. Introduction: Several authors have reported laparoscopic procedures conducted through an umbilical incision, with the intention of further reducing trauma, hospitalization and recovery time compared to conventional laparoscopy. At least two access ports for such surgery are now available commercially, but developmental questions regarding the optimal design for this approach remain unanswered. Methods and Procedures: The authors? institution, a collaboration of physicists, engineers and surgeons, targeted three design issues for transumbilical access: effecting a secure seal between the abdominal wall and the device, ensuring retention against the expelling forces of the pneumoperitoneum and optimizing instrument ergonomics within the limited space. The result is a rigid, conical device, secured with a simple screw form in the peritoneum and containing an array of sealed orifices for endoscopes (5 or 10 mm) instruments (2 to 5 mm) and clip applicators (5 mm). Instruments featuring a 20°proximal curve to left or right are deployed through the device and a dedicated device liver retractor was also invented. Initial evaluation was performed in dead porcine abdomens (n = 5) and thereafter in acute trials on White Landrace pigs (n = 4). Results: Abdominal exploration and laparoscopic cholecystectomy was easily performed on all animals. The screw form provided secure fixation and no CO2 leaks were noted under normal use. Deployment and retrieval of the port was easily accomplished by rotation in the appropriate direction. ?Clashing? of the surgeons hands was resolved by curving the instruments proximally, but the absence of curved laparoscopes and clip appliers impeded freedom-of-motion slightly. Conclusions: The animal studies provide firm evidence of efficacy and human trials may now commence with confidence. It is important to curve the instruments at the point where they emerge from the device to prevent obstruction of hand movements. Further progress will be greatly enhanced by the production of suitably curved endoscopes and clip appliers. The designs are the subject of patent application and licensing agreements. [INTRODUCTION] It is seriously important for living donations to make safer and to reduce operating stress. Laparoscopic surgery is though to be a useful operating procedure for solving these problems. We performed first case of living donor (LD) simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation (SPKTx) in Japan in 2004, and until now, we have done 10 cases of LD-SPKTx. With donor operation, open approach had been performed for first 8 cases. However, in the last two cases, we started hand-assisted laparoscopic (HALS) living donor nephrectomy and distal pancreatectomy for donor benefits. In this presentation, we report successfully completed HALS living donor nephrectomy and distal pancreatectomy. [METHOD AND PROCEDURES] In SPKTx donor operation with HALS approach, the patient was placed in the supine position rotated 30 degrees to the right. Placements of working ports were as follows (one hand port (7 cm [Introduction] Splenic artery aneurysm is not common disease, but has a risk of rupture as the other visceral aneurysms. There are some reports to embolize it by interventional approach, however many of the cases resulted in splenic infarction and consequent splenectomy. Open surgical treatment is the current standard for those cases. We report a case of successful laparoscopic surgery for splenic artery aneurysm. [Patient] 59-year-old man who has hypertension admitted a hospital complained slight back pain. Multi-slice CT scan and MR-angiography showed winding splenic artery and an aneurysm at the pancreas body. The patient consulted us to operate it by laparoscopic procedure. [Procedures] We set the same settings as our laparoscopic splenectomy. We put one of each 11 mm and 12 mm trocar and two of 5 mm trocars. After the dissection and mobilization of spleen and pancreas body from left side, the splenic artery aneurysm was identified. The splenic arteries were isolated, and then the aneurysm was clipped and resected. Splenectomy was performed after confirmed insufficient blood flow in spite of the other branch of splenic artery. All procedures were performed at a time under laparoscopic. [Results] The operating time was 259 min and the bleeding was 100 g. Post operative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged at the five post operative days with minimum wound. [Conclusions] Laparoscopic surgery for splenic artery aneurysm was feasible treatment. The patient does not need to operate emergently for splenic infarction with symptoms. Multi-slice CT scan and MR-angiography were useful to describe the details of aneurysm for diagnosis. Diagnoses included symptomatic cholelithiasis, acute and chronic cholecystitis, and biliary dyskinesia. There were two conversions to a four-port cholecystectomy when inflammatory tissue hindered retraction. There was one major complication of post-operative bleeding due to coagulopathy secondary to chronic medical conditions. There was one minor complication of persistent drainage from the umbilical incision. Conclusion: With effective placement of retraction sutures, visualization and retraction are comparable to that of a muti-port approach. The technique is easy to master, and safe for any patient who is a candidate for laparoscopic cholecystectomy as ports can always be added in the event of a difficult dissection. Further data collection with long term follow-up will be needed to ensure equivalent outcomes. There will be demand for this approach by patients for cosmetic reasons, and it may serve as a bridge to natural orifice techniques. In order to prevent the dissemination of tumourcells the use of an isolation bag is proclaimed. The question is if the intraoperative perforation of gallbladder carcinoma really leads to a prognostic deterioration and if the patients which have been treated with an isolation bag have an prognostic advantage. Material and method: To obtain data we are using the data of the German-registry of incidental gallbladder carcinoma, which is supported by the German Society of Surgery. We are collecting our data with a standarized questionaire, which has been sent to all german and now to all austrian surgical clinics as well. In a period of 3 months we are actualizing the data. Results: 606 cases of incidental gallbladder carcinomas are registered. 335 were operated laparoscopically, 105(31.3%) of them get a relapse of the tumour. 180 patients were treated with the support of an isolation bag, the rate of a relapse was 35% (n = 63). 155 of the laparoscopic group have treated without a isolation bag, the rate of an relapse was 27% (n = 42). In 73 of 335 laparoscopic treated patients there was an intraoperative accidental opening of the organ, the rate of a relapse was 39.7% (n = 29). In 51 of 73 cases an isolation bag was used, the rate of a relapse was 41.2% (n = 21). The other 22 of 73 patients who were operated without an isolation bag have a rate of relapse of 36.4%(n = 8). The group without an intraoperative perforation (n = 262) have 29.0% (n = 76) of tumour reccurence. 129 of this 262 were treated with the use of an isolation bag, 42 (32.6%) of them had a tumour reccurence, the other 133 of the 262 patients treated without a bag had a recurrence rate of 25.6% (n = 34). Discussion: In our registry, the intraoperative perforation leads to a significant prognostic disadvantage(p = 0.046 Fisher's exact test). The patients treated with an isolation bag have a tendency of a higher rate of tumour recurrences (p = 0,055 Fisher's exact test), but the isolation bag was used significantly more often in cases of gallbladder perforation, nevertheless the recurrence rate is higher in patients without a intraoperativ perforation treated with the use of an isolation bag compared with those treated without a bag. The reasons therefore have to be discussed. Background: Natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES) has been proven to be technically feasible in animal models but still has significant limitations for human application. Single-access transabdominal surgery is a competing alternative which obviates the need for multiple incisions. Looking to minimize the operative trauma and following NOTES principles, we used the umbilicus, an existing natural scar, as the sole abdominal entry site to perform laparoscopic appendectomy. Methods and Surgical Technique: We performed laparoscopic transumbilical appendectomy in seven (7) patients with uncomplicated appendicitis. Patients with appendicular mass or abcess were excluded. Three 5 mm laparoscopic trocars were placed within the umbilicus with a bridge of fascia between them. A 5 mm 30 degree angle laparoscopic camera was placed for visualization through one port. A rigid grasper was placed from the other port to manipulate the appendix. The appendiceal mesentery was ligated with ultrasonic scissors. The base of the appendix was ligated with endo-loops. Once the dissection was completed, the appendix was removed from the umbilicus and the umbilicus reconstructed. Results: Seven patients (2 male, 5 female) with a mean age of 38 years (range 28-50) were included in this preliminary study. Mean operative time was 45 min (range 35-55). There were no conversions or postoperative complications. Mean hospital stay was 1.2 days. Conclusion: Laparoscopic single-access appendectomy was safe and feasible in our group of patients and maintains the principle of ?scarless? surgery. The advent of new instruments and access platforms will facilitate the wider application of this technique in the future. Prospective studies will be necessary to compare this technique with conventional laparoscopic appendectomy. Introduction: Biopsy of lymph node tissue helps in the staging of breast cancer, providing reliable prognostic information and identifying patients who will benefit from systemic therapy. Endoscopic techniques combined with liposuction have been developed to provide a minimally invasive technique. Methods and procedures: In endoscopic axillary lymph node removal, very small incisions are made in the axillary skin and removes the lymph nodes using an endoskope. Liposuction is used to remove excess axillary fat. Results: The operative time for endoscopic axillary lymph node removal found no significant difference in operation time between axilloscopy (162 minutes) and open surgery (148 minutes). We found good shoulder-arm mobility at 7 days postoperatively. Only 16% of axilloscopy patiens reported pain on the first postoperative day compared to 38% of open surgery patiens. The incidence of seroma following endoscopic axillary retrieval was 6%, wound infection in 5% of patiens. Conclusion: The axilloscopic approach with liposuction to axillary region presents a safe procedure whose results are more favourable than those of open procedures. Introduction: One-lung ventilation plays a pivotal role in thoracoscopic lung biopsy. However, it has the disadvantages of causing hypoxemia, tracheobronchial trauma and oxidative stress caused by the pulmonary reexpansion, which could be harmful to the postoperative course of interstitial lung disease. We performed needlescopic surgery for interstitial lung disease using two-lung ventilation with low tidal volume and evaluated the feasibility and safety of this procedure. Methods and Procedures: Eighteen patients (male, 8; mean age 58.6 +/)0.96 years) with interstitial lung disease were included in this study. The patients were intubated with a singlelumen endotracheal tube and ventilated with a tidal volume of 10 ml/kg and a respiratory rate of 12 cycles/min at a FiO2 of 0.5. Prior to entering the thoracic cavity, the tidal volume was reduced to 4 ml/kg, and the respiratory rate was increased to 24 cycles/min to maintain the same amount of minute volume as was present initially. A 2-mm needlescope and a 2-mm minisite endograsp were inserted at the sixth intercostal space along the mid and the posterior axillary line, respectively. A biopsy specimen was obtained using 1 or 2 endostaplers via an 11.5-mm port at the fifth intercostal space along the anterior axillary line. Airway pressure, end-tidal CO2, and the results of blood gas analysis were obtained right after endotracheal intubation and during the operation, and were compared. And, anesthesia and operation time were measured. Results: Mean FEV1 and DLCO of the patients was 2.2 +/)1.03L (range, 0.84 $ 3.58) and 64.4 +/)24.05% (range, 35 $ 100). The tidal volume was 565.6 +/)81.22 mL at anesthesia induction, which decreased to 289.4 +/)59.74 mL during the two-lung ventilation. In one patient (5.6%), the tidal volume was additionally decreased by 75 mL to obtain an optimal working field. The differences between the airway pressure were significant between the two measurement time points (22.9 +/)10.62 mmHg at anesthesia induction vs. 17.3 +/)9.22 during operation, p < 0.5). However, pH, PCO2, and PO2 were not significant different. The oxygen saturation (99.1 +/)0.83% vs. 99.5 +/)0.53%, p = NS) and end-tidal CO2 (33.1 +/ )4.29 mmHg vs. 33.3 +/)2.66, p = NS) were not significantly different. The mean number of biopsy was 1.17 +/)0.39 and pathology was confirmed at all cases. The time from intubation before the incision was 17.2 +/)2.56 minutes, the operation time was 21.5 +/)5.62 minutes and the total anesthesia time was 50.0 +/9.24 minutes. There was no case where needlescopic surgery was converted to an open thoracotomy or the two-lung ventilation was converted to one-lung ventilation. The chest tube was removed at postoperative day 1.8 +/)0.96 (range, 1 $ 4) with an exception of a patient who had air leakage until the postoperative 9th day. Conclusions: Needlescopic lung biopsy for interstitial lung disease using two-lung ventilation anesthesia with low tidal volume was much less invasive, safe and technically feasible. INTRODUCTION: Although video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) is now widely accepted. However, VATS procedure is seldom used for pulmonary segmental resection. Various patterns of branching are seen for pulmonary arteries and veins in the lung hilum. Because a surgeon appreciates individual anatomy before an operation, an operative risk is reduced and indication is increased. SUBJECTS and METHODS: Between 1993 and 2007, 857 patients underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) for primary lung cancers or metastatic lung tumors at the Tokyo Women?s Medical University. Among then, 369 patients of anatomical lung resections were attempted using the VATS approach. We produced application software, and anatomical lung resection was simulated with personal computer. Results: VATS was carried out with three surgical ports and small thoracotomy. Furthermore, a pulmonary three-dimension construction was performed using a personal computer, and an operation was simulated. About 1 hour was needed to make a three-dimensional image from 60 DICOM images of 2 mm thin slice CT. With Metasequia LE (free software) we can simulate cut the vessels and change the figure of them 3-dimensionally. The operative method performed 321 lobectomies, 9 bilobectomies and 39 segmentectomies. Median operation time was 278 minutes and average blood loss was 198 g. There population consisted of 235 males and 144 females with a mean ages of 66.7 (range, 28 to 87). Resected segment was S6 (n = 13), left upper seg. (n = 8), left4 + 5 (n = 7), S7 + 8 (n = 5), S1 + 2 (n = 3), S3 (n = 1), S7-10 (n = 1), S10 (n = 1). There was no surgical mortality. Conclusions: Video assisted thoracoscopic anatomical lung resection is safe and may be an acceptable for lung tumors. In conclusion, surgeons appreciate individual anatomy and the simulation is thought to contribute to safety and increase of operative indication. Background: Despite well-established advantages of minimally invasive surgery, laparoscopy lacks of natural stereoscopic depth perception and spatial orientation. Therefore, these 2 parameters appear to represent mayor downsides of minimal-invasive surgery. Still, the importance and overall negative effect of this lack of natural stereoscopic depth perception and spatial orientation has not been clearly demonstrated. The aim of this study was to evaluate if three-dimensional (3D) visualization improves surgical skills and task performance when compared to two-dimensional (2D) vision. Material and Methods: Difference between 3D and 2D vision was tested in 34 individuals of different surgical levels (n = 4: more than 10 years surgical experience, n = 8: 5-10y.; n = 9:1-5y; n = 13: no hands-on professional experience). Each individual performed three different tasks (T1-3) in an open, laparoscopic and robotic surgical technique T1 intended to test three dimensional imaging and spatial relationships by using small rubber rings which had to be placed over soft cones for training simple grasping and positioning. T2 tested dexterity and precision using a suture that had to be passed from instrument hand to hand through 10 flexible small eyelets arranged in an S curve. T3 tested dexterity in suturing and knot tying of a simulated gaping skin incision. Each task was performed in a 3D mode using binocular vision for open performance, the Viking 3Di Vision System for 3D laparoscopic performance and the daVinci system in a 3D mode for robotic performance. Subsequently same tasks were repeated in a 2D mode respectively (open monocular by means of a blindfold, conventional laparoscopy, daVinci 2D mode). Times of each performance was taken and statistically evaluated. Results: Loss of 3D vision increased difficulty and time to perform a task independent of the approach. To solve simple tasks in 2D vision it took about 25% longer than in 3D vision. For more complex tasks 2D vision prolonged the procedure by about 75%. For easy tasks laparoscopic and robotic assisted performance were similar with a trend towards shorter time for performance with the robotic system. For harder tasks performed under 3D vision, roboticassisted performance was faster than laparoscopic performance. 3D robotic-assisted performance was superior to 2D laparoscopic performance, independent of the difficulty of the task. Conclusion: The percentage of time reduction by 3D to perform a task was dependent on the difficulty of the task and independent of the modality. The more complex a task, the more 3D vision increased performance compared to 2D vision. Open approach was superior to laparoscopic or robotic-assisted procedures, independent of the task or vision. For harder than easy tasks performed under 3D vision, robotic-assisted performance is faster than laparoscopic performance. Performance under 2D vision is not significantly different between laparoscopy and robotic-assisted procedures, independent of the difficulty of the task. The importance of vision does not rectify to directly compare laparoscopic surgery with robotic-assisted surgery. The main difference between task performance in laparoscopy and robotic-assisted surgery seems to be the vision! P496 LAPAROSCOPIC INTRAOPERATIVE HYPERTHERMIC CHEMOPERFUSION FOLLOWING RADICAL TOTAL GAS-TRECTOMY: A NOVEL TECHNIQUE Naresh K Ahuja MD, Swati Patel MD, Ramesh Ramanathan MD, Departement of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA Objective of technique: Several neo-adjuvant and adjuvant techniques has been described for advanced gastric cancer, including intraoperative hyperthermic chemoperfusion (IOHC). Laparoscopic radical gastrectomy (LRG) for gastric cancer has also been described, however, concurrent laparoscopic radical gastrectomy followed by IOHC remains unreported. We are reporting laparoscopic IOHC technique for advanced gastric cancer following a LRG. Technique: A 45 years old female, diagnosed with advanced gastric cancer, was found to have absence of disease progression following four cycles of neoadjuvant therapy, was operated for LRG and IOHC. Peritoneal cavity was accessed through five ports: three 5 mm ports were entered at right, left subcostal regions and right flank. Two twelve mm ports were entered at right and left paramedian lines approximately two finger breaths above umbilicus. Following LRG, GI continuity was restored and the crura were re-approximated. Subsequently, the specimen was extracted through extension of left paramedian trocar incision. Under laparoscopic guidance, two-20F inflow and two 30F outflow cannulae were positioned in upper and lower abdomen, through existing trocar site incisions. Peri-cannulae skin incisions were tightened with cannulae anchoring stitches to prevent extravasation of chemo. An intraperitoneal temperature sensor was placed through the abdominal wall. Connections of cannulae to the perfusion machine were established and primed with 3 liters of lactate ringer (LR); thirty mg of Mitomycin C was then added to perfusate. Fluid temperature was maintained to 42-430C and intraperitoneal perfusate temperature was maintained at 41-420C. A flow rate of 1300 ml/min was achieved. After 40 minutes, ten mg of additional Mitomycin C was added. Intraperitoneal chemoperfusion was maintained for a total of 110 minutes. After completion, perfusate was drained and peritoneal cavity was lavaged with 3 liters of LR. The cannulae were removed, ports were reinserted, and peumoperitoneum re-established. Following feeding jejunostomy insertion, a JP drain was placed near anastamosis and duodenal stump. Finally, the ports were removed and wounds closed. Patient tolerated the procedure and discharged expectantly. Conclusion: Laparoscopic intraoperative hyperthermic chemoperfusion can be performed following laparoscopic radical gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer. Methods: Consecutive patients undergoing elective foregut surgery (fundoplication, paraesophageal hernia repair), segmental colectomy, and rectal resection between 2005 and 2007 were identified from a hospital administrative database. The Eclipsys Case Costing System, used for hospital budgeting, produced data for each patient. Descriptive comparisons of matching laparoscopic and open operations were generated. To standardize comparisons, emergencies, day surgeries, perioperative deaths, transfers to and from our institution, and outliers were excluded. Results: In total, 73% of foregut procedures (138/190), and 30% of colorectal resections (314/1,050) were performed laparoscopically. The mean length of stay in hospital was 4.9 days shorter for laparoscopic foregut procedures (2.6 vs. 7.4 days), and 2.2 days shorter for laparoscopic colorectal resections (5.7 vs. 7.8 days). Laparoscopic foregut surgery was associated with a mean $7,961 total saving per case, over open surgery. Laparoscopic foregut procedures were associated with mean savings per case in nursing ($876), operating and recovery rooms ($1,009), and special care unit ($2,178) costs. Laparoscopic segmental colectomies were associated with a mean $1,287 total saving per case, while laparoscopic rectal resections yielded a mean $2,009 total saving per case. Although mean operating and recovery room costs per case were marginally greater for laparoscopic colorectal surgery (segmental $504, rectal $957), significant savings were achieved with nursing ($870) and special care unit ($1,818) expenditures. At current case volumes, laparoscopic procedures have yielded over five hundred thousand dollars per fiscal year in cost savings at our institution. Conclusions: For both foregut and colorectal procedures, laparoscopy appears to be consistently cheaper than open surgery. While operating room costs are marginally higher with laparoscopic colorectal surgery, significant savings are achieved in other areas of patient care due to shorter hospital stays. Background: Rupture of the diaphragm secondary to blunt trauma is not uncommon. It is primarily seen in high speed motor vehicle collisions. Repair of blunt diaphragm injury carries significant morbidity and mortality, especially if diagnosis is delayed. Laparoscopy has been investigated and validated as a diagnostic tool in penetrating trauma. However, its role in blunt diaphragm injury has not been well defined. Protocols defining selection criteria have not been standardized. Methods: Retrospective data review from the Trauma Registry at our institution over a three year period. Detailed clinical data was collected including demographic information, mechanism of injury, method of diagnosis, delay in diagnosis, size and location of the defect, method of repair, operative time, estimated blood loss, and post-operative length of stay. Results: Twenty-four patients were identified with diaphragm injury secondary to blunt trauma. Twenty-one of these were repaired via traditional laparotomy or thoracotomy, two were repaired in a laparoscopic fashion, and one died before any operative intervention. The laparoscopic repairs were performed without significant difficulty, blood loss, or increase in operative time when compared to the open cases. Post-operatively, the laparoscopic patients did not suffer any complications related to their repair. The length of stay for this group of patients was shorter than for those repaired in an open fashion. Conclusions: The overall growth of minimally invasive surgery has led to the application of this technology for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in trauma patients. The results of this review support laparoscopy as an acceptable diagnostic and therapeutic alternative to conventional surgery in the carefully selected patient with blunt diaphragm injury. There may be an advantage of shorter post-operative length of stay in patients repaired with minimally invasive techniques. Ventriculoperitoneal shunt remains one of the most common surgical forms of treatment for hydrocephalus. Many patients will eventually require a shunt revision for malfunction and recurrent hydrocephalus. For abdominal complications of ventriculoperitoneal shunts, laparoscopic techniques have been reported to be successful for shunt repositioning. We describe our recent experience at one institution in a series of adolescent patients. Two patients aged 14 and 17 presented with mental status changes secondary to hydrocephalus and radiologic evidence of a malfunctioning ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Accessing the reservoir determined there was no proximal obstruction and a shunt series of plain x-rays confirmed there was no distal kinking. Abdominal ultrasound confirmed large cystic fluid collections surrounding the intraabdominal catheter. In conjunction with general surgery and the neurosurgery team, an exploratory laparoscopy was planned. A 10 mm balloon tipped trocar was placed in the LUQ and conventional 15 mmHg insufflation was initiated. Two additional 5 mm ports were placed in each case for instrumentation, followed by a brief lysis of adhesions. The intra-abdominal portion of the ventriculoperitoneal shunt in both cases was identified within a fibrous capsule in the right upper quadrant, which was lysed with blunt and sharp dissection. The shunt tip was gently extracted from the pseudocyst, and examined for proper function and CSF flow. The catheter was then repositioned in the pelvis well away from the RUQ pseudocyst. There was no evidence of infection and the cyst was left undisturbed to resorb. In the second case an old, orphan catheter was also removed from the abdomen. Average operating time was 39 minutes. Both patients showed hydrocephalus resolution on post-operative CT scan and were discharged on post-operative day one. Laparoscopic techniques are safe and highly effective means of managing intraabdominal complications from ventriculoperitoneal shunts. A standardized multi-disciplinary approach may combine efficient service and excellent patient care. Adrian G Dan MD, Brian Lenczewski MD, Sean Rines,Steven Schultz BS,John Zografakis MD, Akron City Hospital -Summa Health System -NorthEastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine INTRODUCTION: Peritoneal dialysis (PD) is an effective and accepted method for renal replacement therapy in patients with chronic renal failure. Various laparoscopic techniques have been described separately to optimize placement and reduce the potential of catheter related complications and failure. A study was undertaken to determine the feasibility and efficacy of combining these laparoscopic techniques for optimal placement of PD catheters. Methods: A total of 20 laparoscopic PD catheter placements were attempted over 1 year. Highlights of the technique included placement of an adhesive betadine impregnated drape and betadine catheter site irrigation to avoid infection, use of fascia and muscle separating trocars to avoid hernia formation, omentopexy to the right upper quadrant using transabdominal suture passers to avoid omental wrapping, pre-peritoneal catheter tunneling under laparoscopic guidance, suture anchoring to the anterior abdominal wall to avoid catheter migration and flushing with heparinized saline at the end of the procedure to avoid fibrin clotting. Data regarding patient demographics and characteristics as well as feasibility of placement and any short term complications and catheter failures were recorded. Results: Laparoscopic PD catheter placement was attempted in 20 patients, all with an ASA of 3 or 4 and with a mean age of 55.4 years (M: F = 15:5). Catheter placement was successful in 95% (19/20) of patients and was aborted in one patient with extensive intra-abdominal ascites and adhesions (mean time of surgery = 37 min.). The procedure was performed as an outpatient in 95% (19/20) of patients and 5% (1/20) stayed for 23-hour observation. The mortality rate was 0% and the 30-day morbidity rate was 16% (3/19) and included 1 intra-abdominal hemorrhage, 1 urinary retention and1 catheter site cellulitis. The catheter failure rate was 16% (3/19) and included 2 fibrin clots and 1 failure due to extensive adhesions. A total of 5 catheters were removed including 2 for catheter failure, 1 for intra-abdominal hemorrhage, 1 for patient wish to switch to hemodialysis and 1 due to no need after successful renal transplantation. One catheter required laparoscopic revision of the catheter for fibrin clotting. Conclusion:Optimal placement of PD catheters using a combination of laparoscopic techniques is highly feasible (95%) and efficacious with acceptably low short term catheter complication and failure rates, comparing favorably with reported rates for the standard open technique. Introduction: Needle ingestion is extremly rare among the ingested foreign bodies. The longer, slender, sharp-ended foreign bodies such as needles, the chances of perforation are considerably greater. In most, foreign body ingestion cases are excreted per vias naturals, but in some cases, especially needles, the object does not pass naturally, and lead to perforation of the bowel. The authors experienced 3 cases of needle ingestion . two cases were treated by laparoscopic approach and one case was treated by colonoscopic approach. Case 1 A 34-year-old man who ingested a needle about 10 days ago was refered to our clinic with left lower quadrant(LLQ) pain for 2 days. On Physical examination, the showed tenderness on LLQ area, but no rebound tenderness and muscle guarding. Abdominal plain X-ray and CT scan showed a needle in the descending colon and perforation into retroperitoneum. We performed laparoscopic approach and dissected white line, then removed the needle from descending colon. The regular diet started at POD#4, and patients discharged at POD #6. Case 2 A 55-year-old man, who ingested two needles about 5 days ago, was refered to our clinic with RUQ and periumbilical pain for 2 days. Plain abdominal X-ray and CT scan showed needles located in 2nd portion of duodenum and proximal jejunum and the penetrated bowel wall. By laparoscopic approach, we removed the two needles from duodenum and jejunum and performed irrigation. Case 3 A 30-year -old man who ingested a needle and coil spring of ballpoint pen about a week ago, visited clinic with RLQ pain. On physical examination he showed no tenderness or rebound tenderness. Plain abdominal X-ray and CT scan revealed a needle to be located and stucked in cecum and the coil spring portion located in sigmoid colon. There was no penetration finding. The coil spring was eliminated with defecation 1 day after admission. We performed colonoscopy and removed the needle with snare. Result Laparoscopic approach is treatment of choice that patients who have tenderness or rebound tenderness because needle can penetrate and perforate bowel. It is difficult to perform endoscopic or colonoscopic approach. There was no need of additional suture, and we only performed irrigation and placed JP drain. If there was no perforation sign, the location of needle is adequate for endoscopic or colonoscopic removal, and endoscopic approach is a choice. Aim: To review a single institution?s experience on routine use of laparoscopic repair for perforated peptic ulcers and to determine risk factors that may be associated with increase mortality. Methods: From February 1997 to December 2007, all cases of non-iatrogenic perforated peptic ulcers (PPU) from our institution were retrospectively reviewed. Data collection included patient demographics, ulcer characteristics, operative morbidity and mortality. Results: During the 10-year study period, there were a total of 338 cases of PPU. 28 cases were excluded due to atypical presentation or iatrogenic causes. Of the 310 cases included, 217 underwent laparoscopic patch repair. There were 93 cases of open conversion (30%) due to failure to identify perforation site, large ulcer, severe peritoneal contamination and/or additional procedure required. Overall morbidity rate was 24.8% that included leakage and collection requiring intervention, chest and wound infection, and reoperation. There were 29 cases of mortality (9.4%). Multivariate statistical analysis showed that preoperative risk factors (age > 70, ASA > 3, delayed presentation > 24 h) and intraoperative risk factors (severe peritoneal contamination and operation time) were independently associated with increased mortality. Conclusions: Outcome in laparoscopic repair for PPU can be further improved by careful patient selection. Early open conversion to shorten operation time, as determined by the presence of risk factors, may reduce mortality. This is a rare presentation of Filariasis affecting Retroperitonial region presented with Bilateral Groin Swelling treated by Laparoscopic and bilateral groin excision. Wuchereria bancrofti: the major parasite causing lymphatic filariasis. Hydrocele is the most common manifestation of chronic W. bancrofti infection in males, in endemic areas. CASE REPORT: A 21-year old Nepali male admitted to our hospital in QATAR complaining of bilateral painless groin swelling. By examination, the patient looked healthy, afebrile, not pale, not jaundiced, no lymphadenopathies. Local examination revealed 10 · 8 cm soft swelling on the left groin (femoral triangle) and 6 · 4 cm same consistency swelling on the right side. The overlying skin where intact with no erythema, pigmentations, or dilated veins. The swellings were more prominent on standing while reduced on lying down. Non tender, partially compressible, no thrill or bruit over them, no lower limbs swelling. The patient investigated by Ultrasound which revealed large lobulated soft swelling. CAT scan and MRI showed Retroperitonial infiltrative lesion, extending from the level of the renal hilum down to inguinal regions along the course of iliac vessels. Contrast study from the left groin swelling suggested the diagnosis of lymphangectasia while cytopathology of the aspirate which was bloody chyle showed microfilariae (Wuchereria bancrofti). The patient underwent laparoscopic exploration using 3 trocars same as TAPP technique for hernia repair. Methylen blue injected in the groin swelling externally and showed clear boundaries of the stained lymphangectatic lesion by laparoscopy which facilitated preperitoneal dissection and excision of the lesion down to femoral canal, then followed by external incision in the groin to excise the external component of the lymphangectatic lesion. Histopathology of the excised specimen confirmed the diagnosis of filariasis and the patient was given anti-filarial medications. In Conclusion, this is a rare case of retroperitoneal filariasis extending through the femoral canal to the groin treated by laparoscopic assisted excision and medications. Objective: The role of laparoscopy in small bowel obstruction remains controversial and it has been rarely reported in the treatment of acute obstruction secondary to Meckel?s diverticulum. Chronic intussusception can have variable symptoms and diagnosis is challenging. We present a case of chronic small bowel intussusception in an adult man secondary to Meckel?s diverticulum that was treated laparoscopically. Methods: A case report and review of the literature is presented concerning laparoscopic treatment of chronic intussusception and of Meckel?s diverticulum in the adult. Results: A 53 year old man complained of intermittent abdominal pain and after endoscopic evaluation was found on CT scan to have small bowel intussusception without acute obstruction. A repeat CT scan indicated similar findings. Diagnostic laparoscopy revealed the intussusception and small bowel resection with anastomosis was performed. Pathologic review confirmed chronic intussusception due to Meckel?s diverticulum. Conclusions: Previous case series and reports have indicated that laparoscopy is safe and effective for the evaluation and treatment of symptomatic Meckel?s diverticulum. To our knowledge this is the first report of successful laparoscopic treatment of chronic small bowel intussusception due to Meckel?s diverticulum in the adult. Laparoscopy appears to be safe and effective for the evaluation and treatment of the symptomatic Meckel?s diverticulum. The authors report on a case of stone-stent complex encrusting the entire extra-hepatic biliary tree after biliary stent placed in 1993 for gallstone-associated pancreatitis. The patient presented with cholangitis 14 years after initial treatment, and underwent multiple serial ERCP procedures for biliary decompression and papillotomy, but failed removal of the stent-stone complex. Figure 1 shows MRCP image with complete encrustation of the extra-hepatic biliary tree. Initial treatment consisted of percutaneous biliary decompression with an internalized trans-hepatic drain. After 6-week maturation of the trans-hepatic drain tract, the patient was taken to the operating room for percutaneous cholangioscopic laser lithotripsy. A sheath was placed in the drain tract, enabling passage of a 7.5 French choledochoscope, and the Holmium laser was used with a 200 micron fiber at 1.0 Joules and 10 Hz. The encrusted stone was progressively fractured off the stent in two operative stages separated by two weeks, allowing endoscopic retrieval of the stent at the second stage. Two weeks following the stent retrieval, follow-up cholangiogram revealed complete clearance of the biliary tree ( Introduction: Advantages of laparoscopic surgery have been well demonstrated, though primarily through experiences in industrialized nations. However, there are few reports of laparoscopy performed in developing countries. Economic, logistic and technical factors have been cited as obstacles to performing laparoscopic surgery in underdeveloped nations. Methods: A surgical team consisting of general surgeons, gynecologic surgeons, anesthesiologists, senior surgical residents, and operating room support personnel was assembled. Surgical equipment and supplies were acquired through corporate donations and private purchases. Patients were evaluated by local physicians prior to our arrival, and those with surgical diagnoses were evaluated by our team. Operations were performed at a government sponsored hospital in Uspantan, a rural community in the highlands of Guatemala in July 2008. Results: 65 patients underwent 70 operations. 11/70 (15.7%) were performed laparoscopically, including 8 laparoscopic cholecystectomies, 2 laparoscopic tubal ligations, and 1 diagnostic laparoscopy. 2/8 (25%) cholecystectomies were converted to the open approach: 1 due to severe adhesions from a previously aborted open cholecystectomy, and 1 due to bleeding and equipment malfunction. No post-operative complications were identified prior to discharge from the hospital. Local physicians were contacted 3 months post-operatively, and no other complications were reported. Aging optical systems and insufflation devices represented the greatest challenges intra-operatively. Conclusions: Basic laparoscopic surgery can safely and successfully be performed in developing, resource-poor countries. Technical and economic obstacles exist, but can be overcome with careful patient selection and minor changes in operative technique. Laparoscopic (LAP) surgery has experienced significant growth since the early 1990 s and is now considered the standard of care for many procedures like cholecystectomy. Increased expertise, training and technological advancements have allowed the development of more complex LAP procedures including removal of solid organs. Unlike LAP cholecystectomy, it is unclear whether complex LAP procedures are being performed with the same growth today. Methods:Using the Nationwide Inpatient Sample (NIS) from 1998-2006, patients undergoing elective LAP or open colectomy (n = 209,769), gastrectomy (n = 17,289), splenectomy (n = 9,174), nephrectomy (n = 64,171) or adrenalectomy (n = 5,556) were identified. The Elixhauser index was used to adjust for patient comorbidities. Main endpoints were adjusted in-hospital mortality, adjusted length of stay (LOS) and total hospital charges. Results: Complex LAP procedures account for a small percentage of total elective procedures (colectomy: 4.0%; splenectomy: 8.8%; gastrectomy: 2.4%; nephrectomy 7.0%; adrenalectomy 14.2%). These procedures were performed primarily at urban (94%) and teaching (63%) centers. Although all LAP procedures trended up, the growth was greatest in LAP colectomy and nephrectomy (p < 0.001). All LAP procedures except for gastrectomy had a significantly reduced chance of prolonged length of stay when compared to their respective open procedures and adjusted for patient and hospital factors (p < 0.002). Only LAP splenectomy resulted in a significant hospital cost benefit compared to open splenectomy (p = 0.0002). After adjusting for patient and hospital factors, there was a mortality benefit only for LAP colectomy (OR 0.55; 95% CI 0.39 ) 0.78) and splenectomy (OR 0.27; 95% CI 0.09 ) 0.85) when compared to their respective open procedures. Conclusions: Despite the significant benefits of complex LAP procedures as measured by LOS, hospital charges and in-hospital mortality, the growth of these surgeries has been slow unlike the rapid acceptance of LAP cholecystectomy. Future studies to identify the possible causes of this slow growth should consider current training paradigms, technical capabilities, economic disincentive and surgical specialization. Ismail H Ozerhan MD, Onur C Kutlu MD, Yusuf Peker MD, Sadettin Cetiner MD, Turgut Tufan MD, Gulhane Medical Academy Department of General Surgery Ankara Turkey, Etimesgut 600 Bed Army Hospital Ankara Turkey Background: Direct access under visualization to the abdominal cavity is becoming more popular and new systems are being introduced. The authors summarize their experience on the safety of the ethicon endopath bladeless trocar system. Materials and Methods: 528 procedures (481 Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy, 28 Laparoscopic Gastric Bypass, 19 Laparoscopic Nissens Fundoplication) were performed with the Endopath optical bladeless trocar system between 2005 and june 2008. Total of 1678 ports were placed. No facial closures were performed. Results: Mean followup was 11 months, %82 of the patients were available for followup. No abdominal organ or vascular injuries have been encountered during the procedures. No internal herniation or symptom resembling intrabdominal adhesion formation was seen. Only 1 port side herniation was encountered. %0.05, only 1 port site bleeding was encountered %0.05. No other access site related complications were encountered. Conclusion: Peritoneal access with the Endopath Optical Bladeless trocar system yielded excellent results in our series for the prevention of access site related complications. Althoug these results are yet to be confirmed by other researchers, we believe that bladeless access systems are safe and effective for the prevention of complications. Introduction: In an era of minimal invasive surgery, endoscopic flap harvesting has not been widely accepted as the gold standard for harvesting muscles flaps, despite numerous benefits over the open technique. This is due to a lack of experience for most consultants with this new method. Aim of this study was to determine if the endoscopic techniqe can deliver better results than the clasical one when applied by surgical residents without clasical flap harvesting experience. Materials and Methods: This study analyses three experimental flap models in pigs (gracilis, rectus abdominis, latissimus dorsi) comparing the endoscopic assisted technique with the open one in 23 trainees without extensive endoscopic experience, harvesting a total of 68 flaps. A brief presentations of the techniques used in the endoscopic models is given in contrast to the open models. Evaluation was based on the following criteria: total procedure time, complications, post-op recovery time, Difficulty and learning curve. Results: Endoscopic flap harvesting performed by trainees without extensive experience, still yields better results over the open technique and has major advantages such as minimal donor site morbidity and pain, less scarring and early recovery. The disadvantages include a longer procedure time, 2D vision and a longer learning curve. Mean operating time was significantly higher for the endoscopic procedure (120 -210 min) compared to the open models (90 -150 min). The recovery period ranged from 4 h to 12 h for the endoscopic assisted procedure versus 36 h to 72 h in the open procedure. The overall difficulty was not significantly higher for the endoscopic assisted model (3.26 out of 5) compared to the open one (2.42 out of 5). Conclusions: Given the low complication rate and relative ease of harvest, 24 out of 26 trainees would apply the endoscopic technique in the clinic. We conclude that the endoscopic technique is currently the best way to harvest these types of flaps, despite being underrated by senior consultants. Alberto R Iglesias MD, Atul K Madan MD, Jose M Martinez MD, Emanuele Lo Menzo MD, Diya I Alaedeen MD, Division of Laparoendscopic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Miami Introduction: Single incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy (SILC) may offer advantages over traditional laparoscopic cholecystectomy. However, surgeons must be able to offer this procedure with equal safety and results. Thus, various technical options should be in the repertoire of any surgeon planning on performing SILC. The objective of this study was to describe various technical nuances and options for SILC. Methods: Technical variations and options were reviewed from patients who underwent SILC. Advantages and disadvantages were ascertained from the operating surgeon on all cases. Any other involved laparoscopic surgeons were asked to give input about the various options. Results: For incision the options note were: vertical through the umbilicus, transverse through the umbilicus and below the umbilicus. For access to peritoneal cavity: Veress needle, optical viewing trocar without insufflation, modified Hasson, and blind insertion. For trocars: low profile 5 mm trocars, two 5 mm trocars of varying length, and a larger trocar with separate openings. For optics, options were: angled 5 mm rigid laparoscope, angled 45 cm 5 mm scope and a flexible tip 5 mm laparoscope. For retraction: third instrument and transabdominal sutures. For securing of traction sutures: figure of 8 and clips. For dissecting instruments: standard 5 mm laparoscopic Maryland dissector, standard 5 mm laparoscopic right angle dissector, reticulating and articulating 5 mm laparoscopic Maryland dissector, and 5 mm ultrasonic dissector. For removing the gallbladder: laparoscopic 10 mm retrieval bag versus no bag. The preferred options were a vertical incision through the umbilicus, an optical view trocar, larger trocar with separate openings, flexible tip 5 mm laparoscope, transabdominal sutures, figure of 8, ultrasonic dissector and laparoscopic retrieval bag. Conclusions: While various technical options are available, a preferred and reproducible technique has been developed. Surgeons should understand the various alternatives to their preferred technique in SILC. These various options should enable easier adoption of SILC for most surgeons. Laparoscopic resection for duodenal carcinoid Carcinoids are heterogeneous group of neuroendocrinal tumours. Relatively benign characteristics, slow progression, low metastatic potential and absence of endocrinal activity are typical for localization in duodenum. Type and extent of surgery depends on size and staging of tumour. 27 years old female patient with well differenced carcinoid in the second part of duodenum is presented. The tumour of size 5 · 3·2 mm manifested with abdominal symptomathology did not invaded muscularis propria. Scintigraphy did not demonstrated others pathologic deposits of somatostatin receptors. The wedge resection of duodenal wall was performed laparoscopically with peroperative endoscopic localization and marking of the tumour. Uneventful operation and postoperative course presents contribution of the miniinvasive surgery for specific duodenal lesions. A NOVEL APPROACH TO LAPAROSCOPIC-ASSISTED TRANSGASTRIC ERCP AFTER ROUX EN Y GASTRIC BYPASS Larissa E Coleman MD, Lily Chang MD, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA Background: Since the advent of the Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGBP), an increasing number of patients with altered upper gastrointestinal tract anatomy require endoscope retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). Endoscopic access to the remnant stomach with laparoscopic assistance is a technique well-described in the literature. However, manipulation of the flexible gastroscope within the peritoneal cavity and gastric remnant can be difficult. The purpose of this study was to describe a new variation on the laparoscopic-assisted transgastric ERCP approach. The new approach decreases operative time, eases access into the remnant stomach, and does not add significant cost to the operation. Methods: Five patients with prior history of RYGBP who underwent laparoscopic-assisted transgastric ERCP for post-cholecystectomy common bile duct stones stones over a one year period were reviewed. The first four patients underwent standard laparoscopic access into the abdominal cavity with lysis of adhesions and identification of the remnant stomach. The ERCP scope was introduced into the peritoneal cavity through a left upper quadrant incision, then inserted into the remnant stomach through a gastrotomy. After completion of the ERCP, the scope was removed, and the gastrotomy was closed using a laparoscopic stapler. A new approach was used for the fifth patient. Access to the gastric remnant was identical to the prior patients. In contrast, a sterile rigid sigmoidoscope was placed through the abdominal wall in the left anterior axillary line, then through the gastrotomy, and directed into the antrum directly facing the pylorus. The ERCP endoscope was placed through the sigmoidoscope and easily advanced through the pylorus into the duodenum. Operative times and additional costs were evaluated. Results: The operative times ranged from 137 to 188 minutes in the prior method (137, 141, 169, 188) , with the new method taking only 98 minutes. All of the ERCP?s were accomplished but in much less time and with greater subjective ease to the endoscopist. The operating room cost is about $30.00 per minute. The additional cost of the rigid sigmoidoscope is only $2.73. All of the patients did well and there were no complications. Conclusion: Altered upper gastrointestinal anatomy will continue to become more prominent with the popularity of RYGBP. Access to the hepatobiliary tree via the gastric remnant using laparoscopicassisted endoscopy is a safe and direct approach. With our novel technique using a rigid transabdominal-transgastric sigmoidoscope as an over-tube, this procedure is now faster and easier for the endoscopist, without adding significant cost. We examined the initial clinical experience of Urological LESS surgery in our institution. Methods: Since June of 2008, a total of 10 patients underwent LESS surgery (simple Nephrectomy and renal cryoablation). Surgical Technique: Laparoscopic entry technique is performed using the Veress needle for initial CO2 insufflation. Umbilical site incision is used for the placement of a 12 mm bladeless trocar that is exchanged for the R-Port immediately after successful entry into the intraperitoneal cavity, allowing placement of instruments i.e.;, laparoscopic ultrasound probe, staplers, clip appliers as traditional laparoscopic procedure but through a 1.2 cm incision. The use of ?linear? optics i.e.; Olympus endoeyeTM, and laparoscopic instruments that can offer multiple functions (grasping/cutting/hemostasis); i.e.; GYRUS bipolar cutting forceps, and instruments with high degree of freedom i.e.; Cambridge Endo AutonomyTM Laparo-AngleTM, are pivotal to facilitate this surgical technique. Results: A total of 10 patients underwent LESS (2 Simple Nephrectomy and 8 Renal cryoablation). Table 1 represents demographic data Conclusions: There is a learning curve for the proficient laparoscopic surgeon due to the technical challenge to triangulate and grasp tissues firmly enough to allow traction and counter-traction for exposure and dissection since the optics and working instruments are confined to a single axis or channel. Moreover, LESS surgery appears to be a feasible surgical technique for Urological laparoscopic procedures, i.e.; simple Nephrectomy and Renal cryoablation. Future development of instruments and trocars designed for LESS procedures may allow more complex Urological surgeries to be performed routinely. This technique has been associated with migration of distal LP shunt catheters and can be especially difficult in the high proportion of obese patients, requiring a larger incision with greater associated morbidity and postoperative pain. A laparoscopic approach would also prevent an incision over the catheter path allowing a lower infection rate. We present our technique for the laparoscopic placement of LP shunts. Methods: Between June 2003 and July 2008, 27 patients underwent laparoscopic LP shunt placement. Patients? ages ranged from 12yo to 80yo with a mean of 37yo. 11 of 27 pts had previous LP shunts that were nonfunctioning. Most patients required the shunt due to complications of pseudotumor cerebri but one patient was treated for a recurrent spinal cyst. The follow-up period was current though August 2008. With the patient secured in the lateral decubitus position, the abdomen was entered using a 5 mm Endopath trocar (Ethicon, Cincinnati Ohio) and a 0 degree 5 mm scope. After switching to a 30 degree scope, a limited diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. If adhesiolysis was necessary, then further 5 mm trocars were placed as needed. Under direct visualization, the tunneling rod was placed into the abdomen. Following which, the distal LP shunt was threaded through the tunneling rod into the peritoneum. The proximal shunt was then secured to the valve proximally by Neurosurgery. Through a 2 mm stab incision, the suture passer was used to grasp the shunt and it was then placed into the pelvis. Results: All shunts were placed successfully. There was no associated operative morbidity or mortality. Similarly, there was no postoperative morbidity. Specifically, no patients developed wound complications or preperitoneal distal shunt placement, and the patients experienced decreased pain and morbidity associated with the smaller laparoscopic incisions. Conclusion: Laparoscopic placement of LP shunts offers a safe alternative to the open procedure. Our technique combines the proven efficacy of the open approach, with the proven advantages of laparoscopy, which include decreased postoperative pain, shorter hospital stay, quicker return to normal activity and improved cosmetic results. Indeed, it may also be the preferred technique in select patient populations such as the obese due to ease of intraperitoneal placement and decreased wound morbidity due to the smaller incisions. Objective: The aim of this pilot study was to analyze our initial experience using single umbilical incision cholecystectomy (SILC) with conventional laparoscopic equipment in comparison with standard laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC). METHODS: Between June 1, 2008 and September 30, 2008, data from all consecutive patients undergoing LC by two surgeons were prospectively collected and retrospectively analyzed on an intention to treat basis. SILC cases were selected based on assessment of feasibility by the surgeon. The procedure for SILC varied by retraction techniques and port placement with the goal of obtaining the critical view of safety. Outcome measures were completion rate of LC using a single incision, operative time and assessment of complications. RESULTS: From 27 cholecystectomies performed during the study period, SILC was attempted in 16 patients and successfully completed in eight (50%). The other eight patients required 1-3 additional incisions. The critical view was achieved in all cases. Placement of transabdominal sutures allowed for adequate anterior retraction of the fundus and lateral retraction of the infundibulum in some cases. Visualization was improved when using a flexible tip laparoscope (Olympus LTF-VH 5 mm Deflectable Tip Video Laparoscope). The close proximity of ports at the umbilical incision decreased range of motion and limited triangulation making the operation technically challenging, although average operating time for attempted SILC was not different compared to standard LC (86 vs 70 minutes). Intra-operative complications in the SILC group included a cystic artery injury and two cases of bile leak after placement of retraction sutures. The only complication in the LC group was a grade I hepatic duct injury. There were three post-operative wound complications in the SILC group and none in the LC group. CONCLUSION: SILC using conventional laparoscopic instrumentation is safe but has limitations. Development of new medical devices, instruments, and techniques will be required for more consistent success. Further studies should define selection criteria and determine any benefits compared with standard LC. Introduction: Single Incision Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy (SILC) is emerging as a potentially less invasive alternative to both standard laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) and NOTES cholecystectomy. However, as this technique becomes more widely employed, it is important to maintain the ability to perform the critical view (CV) dissection and intraoperative cholangiography (IOC). We present our initial experience with SILC using the CV dissection and routine IOC. Methods: Fourteen patients with biliary colic were offered SILC. Exclusions were acute cholecystitis, morbid obesity, and prior upper midline abdominal surgery. The SILC approach was performed via the umbilicus and critical view dissection (with photo documentation) was attained prior to clipping or transection of any ductal structures. IOC was done using various needle puncture techniques. Assessment of CV was carried out retrospectively by independent surgeon (SMS) review of operative still photos in 15 of 16 cases using a three point grading scale under IRB approval. One point was given for each of the following: visualization of only two ductal structures entering the gallbladder, a clear hepatocystic triangle, and separation of the base of gallbladder from the liver. Results: SILC was performed in 16 patients (6 M, 10F). Average BMI was 28 ± 4.6. Mean OR time was 125 ± 31.4 min. Fourteen of 16 cases were performed as single incision and two cases required one supplementary 3 or 5 mm subcostal port. Complete IOC was successful in 14/16 cases (87.5%). One attempted IOC was unsuccessful and a 2nd IOC showed incomplete filling of the proximal ductal system due to contrast extravasation at the cystic duct. Critical view was achieved at the time of operation in all 16 cases. Photo documentation review confirmed CV by all 3 criteria in 10 cases, 2 of 3 in 2 cases, and 1 of 3 in two. In only one case was photo documentation inadequate to verify any of the three CV criteria. Conclusions: As laparoscopic cholecystectomy becomes less invasive, proven safe dissection techniques must be maintained. Dissection to obtain the critical view should be the goal of every single incision case and routine IOC can be done in a high percentage of cases. These measures should help ensure that patient safety considerations are foremost in the evolution of minimally invasive approaches to cholecystectomy. Laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery for primary and recurrent hiatus hernia in a tertiary referral centre in 1125 cases Method: Retrospective analysis of laparoscopic antireflux surgery performed under one consultant in an Upper GI tertiary referral centre. Referral pattern, learning curve, specialist training and late outcomes were analysed for all anti-reflux surgery from January 1996 to December 2007. Data were analysed for Laparoscopic Nissen fundoplication (LNF), repair of Para-oesophageal hiatus hernia and recurrent laparoscopic anti-reflux surgery. Results: During the study period, a total of 1125 procedures were performed for 1115 patients-1006 LNF, 98 laparoscopic para-oesophageal hiatal hernia (LPH) repairs and 21 laparoscopic redo hiatal hernia (RDH) repairs where the initial operation was performed in another centre. In 1996 only 12 LNF were performed whereas in 2007, 145 LNF were performed, representing a 12-fold increase. The median operating time in 1996 and 2007 were 145 mins and 70 mins respectively. There were 156 patients with Barrett?s oesophagus, 52 had strictures due to gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GORD) requiring dilation. Majority of the referrals were from the gastroenterologists and general practioners (GP). Respiratory physicians and ear, nose and throat (ENT) referrals accounted for 60 cases, 49 of these had asthma, with symptoms refractory to conventional medical treatment. All the asthma patients? symptoms improved and remarkably 41(83%) patients were off all medications. The consultant performed 746 LNF whereas trainees (senior residents) performed 264 cases under supervision. There were 4 conversions to open in LNF due to bleeding, splenectomy and dense adhesions, and 4 in LPH because they were very large hernias. 4 (RDH) were completed laparoscopically. Eight patients (0.7%) developed post-operative dysphagia but were treated conservatively. Good number of patients (39%) went home within 24 hours and 53% within 48 hours. 99% of the patients followed up in the outpatients were happy with the surgical results. The learning curve seems to plateau after nearly 5 years of antireflux operations or after 200 cases. The average time taken to return to normal daily activities was 2 weeks. Conclusion: Laparoscopic antireflux surgery is safe, effective and durable in the treatment of GORD. Tertiary referral centre offers invaluable training opportunities for senior surgical trainees. Every year in the U.S., near 100,000 patients develop perforated appendicitis due to delayed or incorrect diagnosis, and nearly 98,000 unnecessary appendectomies are performed. These errors cost over $2.4 billion a year in hospital charges, lost wages, and medical malpractice lawsuits. 2. Objectives: Development of a device and procedure to rapidly assess abdominal pain in the emergency room for patients with suspected appendicitis and unclear symptoms. The procedure is based on direct visualization of abdominal structures under local anesthesia and sedation. 3. Methods: The patented device Trocamera has been developed comprised by three systems: space creation, visualization and navigation control. First tests were carried out on corpses to assess basic functionality; and in a living swine to assess usability in real conditions. Prototype was improved based on these findings and evaluated by three surgeons in recently deceased human bodies, who assessed usability in terms of: usage understanding, comfort, ease of control, and structure recognition. 4. Preliminary results: The usability evaluation of Trocamera showed that it is possible to generate a space large enough to identify structures with minimum fatigue and satisfactory navigation control and orientation. Visualization quality is enough to recognize structures, but does not match laparoscopic standards. 5. Conclusions: The main innovative features of Trocamera are the means to generate a working space that enables efficient visualization of intrabdominal structures, and a navigation arrangement to control image capture. Visualization quality, although paramount for an accurate diagnosis, is not the focus of the research since this has already been solved. Preliminary results demonstrate that the main features of Trocamera achieve surgeon approval for rapid recognition of normal structures in the abdominal cavity. Introduction: Acute care surgery for peritonitis and perforated ulcer has traditionally been performed open, but in select circumstances may be safely performed laparoscopically with good outcomes. Methods: A retrospective chart review of emergent cases in an academic medical center involving acute abdomen from 2007 to 2008 included three perforated duodenal ulcers and one marginal ulcer following Roux-en-Y gastric bypass which were repaired laparoscopically. Patient records were reviewed for complications and follow-up was established through clinic records. Results: Four patients who presented with acute abdomen and imaging consistent with pneumoperitoneum were emergently explored laparoscopically and found to have perforated ulcers (three duodenal ulcers and one at a previous gastrojejunostomy for gastric bypass). The perforations were repaired with Graham patches and purulent contamination was irrigated laparoscopically. There were no operative complications. Patients were treated for Helicobacter pylori postoperatively and were discharged on regular diet and oral antibiotics. Mean hospitalization was 5 days. No complications were noted on follow-up. Conclusion: Despite conventional teaching at academic medical centers that emergent laparotomy should be performed for pneumoperitoneum, emergent laparoscopic surgery for perforated ulcers with peritonitis is an acceptable and safe alternative to traditional open surgery. Objective: To test whether assistance with the da Vinci surgical system improves the learning curve for a complex minimally invasive (MIS) operation over laparoscopy alone using an ex-vivo model of biliary enteric anastomosis. METH-ODS: An ex-vivo model for choledocho-jejunostomy (CDJ) was created using specimens of porcine liver that included an intact extrahepatic biliary system and a contiguous loop of proximal intestine. Minimally invasive CDJs were performed by three surgeons with graduated experience in minimally invasive surgery: Surgeon A (MIS and robotic focus); Surgeon B (experienced MIS); Surgeon C (basic MIS). All three surgeons had extensive open surgical experience in CDJ. Each surgeon performed 10 da Vinci robot-assisted and 10 laparoscopy alone CDJs. The primary objective was the learning curve as measured by comparing mean time to completion of the first three versus the last three anastomoses using each technique. Introduction: Evaluation of the learning curve of robotic surgery has shown reduced errors and decreased task completion and training times, as compared with regular laparoscopic surgery. However, most training evaluations of robotic surgery have only addressed retention in less than a month after completion of training. Aim: Our goal was to investigate the amount of surgical skill retained after 3 months of training with the da Vinci Robotic Surgical System. Methods: After completing an initial training program, the participating medical students were tested for retention after one day, one week, one month, and 3 months. To quantify retention both objective and subjective parameters were tested. A repeated measure ANOVA was used to determine statistical significance. Results: Time of task completion was decreased from pre-to post-training (p = 0.007) and was retained from pre-training to all the corresponding retention periods: 1 day (p = 0.003), 1 week (p = 0.005), 1 month (p = 0.005), and 3 months (p = 0.007; Figure 1 ). The total distance traveled did not show significant difference between pre-testing and any retention tests. The modified objective structured assessment of technical skills (OSATS) for robot assisted surgery showed improved performance from pre-test to post-test (p = 0.002) and all the retention tests maintained this improvement ( Figure 2 ). Participants reported familiarity, increased self-confidence and mastery to perform robotic surgical tasks after training. Conclusions: All medical students retained their fundamental surgical skills 3 months after receiving the robotic surgical training program emphasizing the quality of our training protocol. Introduction: Over the past decade, laparoscopic surgery became the standard approach for the repair of hiatal hernias. Large hiatal hernias remain challenging to the laparoscopic surgeon. The difficulties originate from the depth of the hernia in the mediastinum as well as the narrow orifice (hiatus) to dissect beyond. We present a novell study for the robotic repair of 4 large hiatal hernia involving the stomach and other organs in the mediastinum. Materials and Methods: Four consecutive patients presented to the University of Kansas with huge hiatal hernias. Two patients were males and 2 were females. The mean age was 64.5 ± 12.2. The main symptom was bloating in all patients. Gastroesophageal reflux was a symptom in 2 (50%) patients. Recurrent pneumonia and difficulty of extubation from previous surgery were the main reason for diagnosis in one (25%) patient. The Da Vinci robot was used to perform the entire steps of the procedures in all patients. Dissection was prerformed using either the ultrasonic shears or the electric hook. The hiatal repair was performed using the Crura Soft Bard mesh? in all patients. Primary repair was not feasible due to the large size of the defect. Intraoperative endoscopy was performed in 2 patients to evaluate the integrity of the esophagus. Three patients had Rosetti-Nissen (360°) fundoplication and one patient had Toupet fundoplication (270°). One patient required Leigh-Collis gastroplasty to overcome a short esophagus. Results: All patients tolerated the procedures well. Robotic assisted laproscopic repair was successful in all patients. The mean operative time was 192.5 ± 26.6 minutes. Mean Blood loss was 43.75 ± 41.5 ml. No postoperative mortality. Three patients were extubated immediately postoperatively. One patient developed postoperative pneumonia. Mean stay in the hospital was 9.5 ± 9.46 days. One patient developed postoperative dysphagia (4 months later) which required esophageal dilation.Conclusion: These technically challenging hiatal hernias can be repaired successfully with the Da Vinci telesurgical system. It provides the surgeon with the necessary degrees of freedom and the instrument?s length to facilitate a deeper access in the chest through the hiatus. Introduction: This study demonstrates the effectiveness of a new, compact surgical robot at improving laparoscope guidance. Currently, the assistant guiding the laparoscope camera tends to be less experienced and requires physical and verbal direction from the surgeon. Human guidance has disadvantages of fatigue and shakiness leading to inconsistency in the field of view. This study investigates whether replacing the assistant with a compact robot can improve the stability of the surgeon?s field of view and also reduce crowding at the operating table. Methods: A compact robot based on a bevel-geared ?spherical mechanism? with 4 degrees of freedom and capable of full dexterity through a 15 mm port, was designed and built. The robot was mounted on the standard railing of the operating table and used to manipulate a laparoscope through a supraumbilical port in a porcine model with a joystick controlled externally by a surgeon. The process was videotaped externally via digital video recorder and internally via laparoscope. Robot position data were also recorded within the robot?s motion control software. Results: The robot effectively manipulated the laparoscope in all directions to provide a clear and consistent view of liver, small intestine and spleen. Its range of motion was commensurate with typical motions executed by a human assistant and was well controlled with the joystick. Conclusions: Qualitative analysis of the video suggested that this method of laparoscope guidance provides highly stable imaging during laparoscopic surgery, which was confirmed by robot position data. Because the robot was table mounted and compact in design, it increased standing room around the operation table and did not interfere with the workspace of other surgical instruments. The study results also suggest that this robotic method may be combined with flexible endoscopes for highly dexterous visualization with more degrees of freedom. Background: Mucinous cystic neoplasms of the pancreas are distinct entities with malignant potential, the vast majority occurring in middle aged women. The presence of ovarian struma and lack of communication with the main pancreatic duct is required for the diagnosis of mucinous cystic neoplasm. Case history: We report on a twenty six year old female, with a past medical history significant for HIV infection, well controlled with HAART, who presented with post prandial abdominal pain and underwent routine evaluation, including a CT scan. The CT scan demonstrated gallstones, as well as a cystic lesion in the tail of the pancreas. The patient underwent a robotic distal pancreatectomy and cholecystectomy. The patient had a successful resection with negative margins and was discharged home on post operative day nine. Conclusion: To our knowledge, this is the first report of an HIV + patient with a mucinous cystic neoplasm and robotic resection. As patients with HIV disease live longer and more patients obtain abdominal imaging, this patient population will likely increase, but there is no known association at this time. Objective: After introduction in the 1990 s, the minimally invasive approach for lung resection is performed in specialized institutions. Various minimally invasive techniques have been proposed, with and without minithoracotomy. Variations in the technique include an anterior versus a posterior approach, either with or without rib spreading. This study discusses a technique using anterior minithoracotomy for access in robot-assisted VATS. Methods: The introduction of the da Vinci Surgical System (Intuitive) in our clinical practice has allowed us to overcome some of the limitations of standard thoracoscopic instruments but presents other technical challenges. The robotic system is more rigid and requires additional space as compared to the standard VATS approach. Moreover, because of the anatomy of the chest, there is potentially increased risk of acute bleeding requiring rapid conversion to the open technique. The minithoracotomy, placed in the infra-mammary fold, is performed once the feasibility of the procedure is addressed, and serves as the access point for one of the robotic instruments, the port for the assistant at the patient?s side, as well the specimen retrieval site. Results: After 36 robotic pulmonary resections, we standardized a technique that allows the completion of a safe pulmonary resection using two trocars and one 4 cm anterior minithoracotomy at the inframammary fold without rib spreading. Out of 36 robotic assisted lung resections we performed the last 26 using the anterior thoracotomy technique: 21 lobectomies, 4 bilobectomies, 1 pneumonectomy (14 female, 12 male) with a mean age of 68 years, no intraoperative morbidity or mortality was reported. Conclusion:Using an anterior minithoracotomy potentially increases the safety of the procedure without adding an additional incision for extraction of the specimen and further provides a satisfactory aesthetic result since the incision is hidden in the infra-mammary fold. We consider this approach safe and reproducible and present our technique and experience for discussion. OUTPATIENT LAPAROSCOPIC HYSTERECTOMY WITH SAME DAY DISCHARGE, A CASE SERIES Interventions: Operative Technique consitently utilized five access ports and radiofrequency energy for the dissection. In the Laparoscopic Supracervical Hysterectomy (LSH), morcellation and removal of the uterus was performed through the umbilical access point. In the Total Laparoscopic Hysterectomy (TLH), the specimen was removed vaginally and colpotomy closure was performed laparoscopically. Consistent anesthesia protocols with aggessive and preemptive management of postoperative pain and nausea facilitate a pedictable and reproducible recovery pattern in patient. Concomitant operations including lysis of adhesons, enterolysis, resection of endometriosis, pelvic support surgery, and urinary incontinence slings do not alter the abiility to achieve rapid discharge to home. No complications resulted in conversion to laparotomy or transfer to hospital. Overall complication rate was 3.8%. Conclusion: The Laparoscopic Supracervical (LSH) and Total Laparoscopic Hysterectomy (TLH) can be safely and efficiently performed in a completely outpatient setting with rapid same day discharge to home within 6 hours of surgical completion. Properly selected patients and adequately trained surgeons facilitate a successful transition to the outpatient environment. Vered Avidan-Noy MD, Petachia Reissman MD, Department of surgery, Shaare-Zedek medical center, Jerusalem. Background: Laparoscopic Adrenalectomy (LA) is the gold standard approach for small sized adrenal tumors. Tumors larger than 6 cm harbor an increased risk of malignancy, and the oncological adequacy of the LA in these cases was not proven. In addition, the technical challenge, and hence the safety of the LA in large adrenal masses is questionable. Hypothesis: LA is technically safe and oncologically adequate for adrenal tumors larger than 6 cm. Methods: Retrospective review of patients who underwent LA for large adrenal tumors, defined as 6 cm or more per preoperative imaging or per intraoperative assessment, between 1997-2008. Results: Out of 200 LA performed during the study period, 40 patients met inclusion criteria. Right: left = 22:18. Mean age: 52.9 years, range 11-81. Indications: Non functioning large / enlarging tumor 12 (30%) Pheochromocytoma 12 (30%), in 2 suspected to be malignant Cushing?s syndrome 9 (22.5%) Metastasis 3 (7.5%) Virilizing tumor, cystic mass, Adrenocortical Carcinoma (ACC), and Adrenocorticotropin Independent Macronodular Adrenocortical Hyperplasia -1 (2.5%) patient each. Pathological diagnoses: Adenoma 17 (42.5%) Pheochromocytoma 11 (27.5%), one of them suspected to be malignant Myelolipoma 5 (12.5%) Metastasis 3 (7.5%) ACC 3 (7.5%) Cortical hyperplasia 1 (2.5%). Mean tumor size: 7.5 ± 1.8, range 4.5-11 cm. There were three (7.5%) conversions. Mean operative length: 156 ± 61 minutes, excluding converted procedures. Mean length of stay: 4 ± 1.5 days. Intraoperative complications: major and minor bleeding occurred in 2 (5%) and 4 (10%) patients, respectively. Postoperative complications (all minor) occurred in 8 (20%) patients. One patient with ACC died of CVA 7 days after surgery. Of the 3 patients with primary adrenal malignancies, no patient developed local recurrence, but one developed distant metastasis (follow up: 9-36 months). Conclusions: LA for large adrenal tumors is technically safe, with acceptable rates of intraand postoperative complication and low mortality rate in high volume centers. The incidence of primary malignancy in large adrenal tumors is lower than was traditionally taught. Due to small number of malignancies, it is impossible to discuss the oncological safety. Introduction: This is a unique case of a pheochromocytoma secreting both ACTH and CRH. Pheochromocytomas secreting either CRH or ACTH have been reported in the literature and are a rare cause of Cushing?s syndrome. To date, there are no reports of a pheochromocytoma producing both hormones. Background: A 38-yr-old previously healthy female presented with a 2 week history of anasarca, headache and severe hypertension . Evaluation revealed evidence of pheochromocytoma and Cushing?s syndrome (Table 1) ; an abdominal MRI showed a 4-cm left adrenal mass and right adrenal hyperplasia. After excluding other sources of ectopic ACTH and CRH production, the diagnosis of combined CRH / ACTH secreting pheochromocytoma was made. Outcome: After pre-operative alpha blockade, an attempt at steroid synthesis blockade with ketoconazole was unsuccessful in reducing cortisol levels. After blood pressure stabilization, laparoscopic left adrenalectomy was performed and resulted in rapid normalization of all biochemical abnormalities (Table 1) . Histology and immunohistochemistry demonstrated a 3.5-cm pheochromocytoma with strong staining for ACTH. Summary: Although rare, ectopic production of ACTH, CRH or both by pheochromocytomas, should be considered when evaluating patients with severe hypertension and evidence of hypercortisolism.  