10. Ganda, O. P. et 01
P Lally, J Chirgwin, B Cordell, P Lacy, M Kostianovsky, M Walker, T Edlund, A Boulet, W Rutter, P Barr, W Rutter, A Przybyla, R Macdonald, R Sobel, B Blanchette, A Bhan, R Colvin,  Immun
the return to basal glucose levels were similar for the transgenic and control animals. In addition, intravenous (i.v.) administration of glucagon increased serum glucose levels by -50% within 15 min in both transgenic and control mice. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that serum glucose levels were appropriately modulated in the transgenic mice. The weights of the transgenic mice, growth rates, feeding behaviour, reproductive capability and longevity appeared normal.
the return to basal glucose levels were similar for the transgenic and control animals. In addition, intravenous (i.v.) administration of glucagon increased serum glucose levels by -50% within 15 min in both transgenic and control mice. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that serum glucose levels were appropriately modulated in the transgenic mice. The weights of the transgenic mice, growth rates, feeding behaviour, reproductive capability and longevity appeared normal. The role of human insulin in the regulation of blood glucose levels in transgenic mice was investigated by performing a glucose tolerance test on transgenic and control mice (Fig. 3b) . No human C-peptide was detected in the sera of fasting transgenic mice, but within 10 min of i.p. administration of glucose, human C-peptide appeared in the serum, and peak levels were attained within -20 min. By 45 min post-glucose, human Cpeptide levels fell to values approaching the pre-stimulation or basal level. This pattern of human C-peptide expression correlates closely with the glucose tolerance curves presented above, and suggests that serum human insulin levels were being appropriately regulated by glucose. The control mice did not express any detectable human C-peptide, indicating that the human gene must have been the source of the human C-peptide in the transgenic animals. Insulin is regulated by several other factors, including amino acids and certain pharmacological agents. An i.v. amino-acid infusion test was performed on fasting transgenic and control mice and human C-peptide levels in the serum were determined. Peak human C-peptide levels were seen within 5 min of aminoacid infusion and declined gradually over the next 40 min (Fig.  3c) . Similarly, serum human C-peptide levels responded to tolbutamide, a sulphonylurea derivative known to promote insulin release lo (Fig. 3d) . Within 20 min of i.v. tolbutamide administration, serum human C-peptide levels peaked, then decreased rapidly over the next 10 min. Tolbutamide has been used clinically to diagnose insulinomas ll because in normal subjects serum insulin (or C-peptide) levels rapidly return to normal from their tolbutamide-induced peak, but in insulinoma patients elevated insulin levels persist. That the transgenic mice quickly regained basal serum human C-peptide levels supports the conclusion that their insulin expression was tightly regulated. We have demonstrated that the human insulin gene is expressed in the pancreas of transgenic mice. Cell-type-and tissue-specific expression of h uman 12 and rae Z -14 insulin genes has been documented in two other laboratories. A 230-base-pair (bp) region (from -103 bp to -333 bp with respect to the transcriptional start site) of the rat insulin I promoter was reported to be sufficient to allow tissue-specific expression of insulin/ chloramphenicol acetyltransferase fusion genes in a hamster pancreatic cellline lz .I3. Similarly, a rat insulin II/ simian virus 40 large-T antigen fusion gene has been reported to cause the development of islet cell tumours in transgenic mice l4 • As both of these studies used fusion genes, the regulation of circulating human insulin could not be studied. Serum insulin levels are regulated by glucose, amino acids, proteins and drugs such as the sulphonylurea derivatives. The human insulin gene in these transgenic mice is regulated appropriately by all of these agents, and serum glucose homeostasis is normal. These transgenic animals can therefore now be used to study several critical aspects of the physiological regulation of insulin gene expression, including the mechanisms controlling serum insulin and total f3-cell insulin levels. Because at least one additional insulin gene is being expressed in the transgenic mice and total insulin RNA and protein levels are approximately the same as in control mice, the question of dosage compensation can be investigated. Moreover, our tolbutamide results indicate that drugs thought to affect human insulin metabolism can now be tested in an in vivo animal system. In a more general sense, the in vivo effects of various pharmacological agents on human gene expression and protein function can therefore be evaluated in a non-human setting. Finally, it is noteworthy that a 12.5-kb DNA fragment contains sufficient information for the appropriate physiological regulation of insulin levels in these transgenic mice. The organism's ability to modulate foreign DNA sequences and proteins on a minute to minute basis clearly has important implications for both molecular biology and gene therapy. We thank Dr Tom Wagner for instruction in microinjection, Victoria Roman for technical assistance and Patrick Mattoon for animal care. The human C-peptide assay was the gift of Dr H. H. Schoene and Behringwerke, AG. This work was supported by grants from Hoechst AG and the NIH (AM-07055). Genetic recombination of DNA is one of the fundamental mechanisms underlying the evolution of DNA-based organisms and results in their diversity and adaptability. The importance of the role of recombination is far less evident for the RNA-based genomes that occur in most plant viruses and in many animal viruses. RNA recombination has been shown to promote the evolutionary variation of picornaviruses l -4, it is involved in the creation of defective interfering (DI) RNAs of positive-and negative-strand virusesS--9 and is implicated in the synthesis of the messenger RNAs of influenza virus lO and coronavirus ll • However, RNA recombination has not been found to date in viruses that infect plants. In fact, the lack of DI RNAs and the inability to demonstrate recombination in mixedly infected plants has been regarded as evidence that plants do not support recombination of viral RNAs. Here we provide the first molecular evidence for recombination of plant viral RNA. For brome mosaic virus (BMV), a plus-stranded, tripartite-genome virus of monocots, we show that a deletion in the 3' end region of a single BMV RNA genomic component can be repaired during the development of infection by recombination with the homologous region of either of the two remaining wild-type BMV RNA components. This result clearly shows that plant viruses have available powerful recombinatory mechanisms that previously were thought to exist only in animal hosts, thus they are able to adapt and diversify in a manner comparable to animal viruses. Moreover, our observation suggests an increased versatility of viruses for use as vectors in introducing new genes into plants. 1 Schematic representation of the postulated conformation of the tRNA-like structure at the 3' end of BMV RNA3 (after Rietveld et al. '4) . The open box indicates the location of the 20-nucleotide deletion (deletion m4) so that the entire D arm is absent from the resulting structure. This deletion, located between nucleotides 81 and 100, was originally introduced into a cDNA clone comprising the last 200 bases of BMV RNA3 as described in ref. 19 and subsequently transferred into the full-length cDNA clone of BMV RNA3 as described in ref. 21 . To study recombination between the individual BMY RNAs, we used wild-type RNA1 and RNA2 together with an engineered BMY RNA3 in which a sequence located in its 3'-proximal noncoding region had been deleted. The 3'-noncoding region for each of the three BMY RNAs extends for -300 nucleotides, the last 200 of which are similar in sequence but not identical in the three RNAs12. Their 3'-proximal 134 nucleotides are folded into a transfer RNA-like conformation I3 • 14 , which is involved in initiation of BMY RNA replication' 5,16, aminoacylation 17 and adenylation l8 . The RNA3 mutant, designated m4, had been constructed previously by SI nuclease deletion of a 20-base long, stem-and-Ioop hairpin corresponding to arm D in its tRNA-like structure'9 (bases 81-100; see Fig. 1 ). RNAs 1 and 2, transcribed from cDNA clones of wild type (Madison M1 strain)20, together with transcribed m4-type RNA3, are infectious to barley plants and progeny virus initially has the m4-type 3' region in both RNA3 and RNA4 (ref. 21) . RNA4 is a subgenomic RNA derived during virus infection from the 5'-proximal one-third of negative-strand RNA3 (ref. 22 ). However, m4 RNA3 and RNA4 accumulated less well than their wild-type counterparts, probably because of modified activity of the m4-type 3' region, as determined in vitro'9.21 . We therefore decided to test the possibility that, after a prolonged infection, the original m4 RNA3 might be outcompeted by a revertant form of RNA3 which had regained the deleted stemand-loop region as a result of recombination with wild-type RNA1 or RNA2. Time-course analysis of progeny viral RNA3 species from successively appearing leaves of plants inoculated with transcribed wild-type RNAs 1 and 2 and m4 RNA3 revealed a stepwise decrease of the m4 RNA3 over days 3-16 after inoculation (Fig. 2) . The presence of the m4 deletion near the 3' end in RNAs 3 and 4 was determined by observation of a readily identifiable, 3'-terminal fragment released by partial digestion with ribonuclease Tl (ref. 23 ). The disappearance with time of the 141-base-Iong m4-type fragment expected for m4 RNA3, and the parallel appearance of a 161-base fragment characteristic of Wild-type RNA3 (compare lanes 2 and 4 of Fig. 2 ) indicated a gradual increase of an RNA3 variant that was more similar to wild-type RNA3. To delineate the emergent RNA more precisely, we examined progeny RNA3 and RNA4 isolated from three individual barley plants on day 15 post-inoculation. In plant I we found that the variant RNA3 and RNA4 each migrated more slowly on agarose Methods. Barley seedlings were inoculated with a mixture oftranscribed wild-type BMV RNAs 1 and 2 and the m4 RNA3 following the procedure described in ref. 20 . Progeny viral RNA was isolated from virus extracted from 0.1 g of leaves of a single infected plant, as described elsewhere 27 • The BMV RNA3 component was separated by electrophoresis on a low-melting point 1 % agarose gel and a 3'-terminal fragment was released from the purified RNA3 by limited digestion with RNase T, as described elsewhere 23 • To generate standard 161-and 141-bp T, fragments, both Wild-type and m4 RNA3 were synthesized by transcription in vitro as described in ref. 28 , and the fragments were released from transcripts with RNase T,. After labelling of the 3' ends with 32p_pCp and T4 RNA Iigase 29 , the released RNA fragments were analysed on a 6% polyacrylamide/7 M urea sequencing gel and their positions were determined by autoradiography. gel electrophoresis than m4-type and also wild-type RNAs 3 and 4 (see Fig. 3, lanes 1 and 2) , indicating that they are larger than both m4-type and wild-type RNAs 3 and 4. There was no evidence of m4-type or wild-type RNA3 or RNA4. This pattern was unaltered after two passages of the virus through other barley plants. Sequence analysis of RNA3 from the emergent virus (designated mutant A; see Fig. 4 legend) indicated that the region corresponding to the last 267 bases of wild-type RNA3 had been replaced with the last 307 bases of wild-type RNA2. Thus, mutant A RNA3 had the deleted stem-and-loop region restored plus 39 more bases than wild-type RNA3 and 59 more bases than its m4 RNA3 progenitor. In plant II, viral RNA3 and RNA4 co-migrated with Wild-type BMY RNA3 (Fig. 3, lanes 4 and 5) . Electrophoresis on a higherresolution gel showed that the RNA3 was composed of at least two bands, the lower band containing most of the material (Fig.  3, lane 6, bands 3a and 3b) . In plant III, gel electrophoresis revealed two bands each in the regions of RNA3 and RNA4 (compare lanes 7 and 10 of Fig. 3) ; a similar pattern was present after the first passage of the virus (lane 8), whereas after the second passage the upper band was absent (lane 9). Analysis on a higher resolution gel indicated that the lower band in the region of RNA3, present as a single band in lane 9, in fact consisted of at least two closely migrating bands (lane 11, bands 3c and 3d). To identify the species present in RNA3 preparations obtained from plants II and III, a complementary DNA library was created and individual clones were sequenced in their 3'noncoding regions, as described in Fig. 4 legend. Three sequences, corresponding to mutants designated B, C and D, were found in both libraries. In addition, a fourth sequence, corresponding to mutant E, was identified in the library of plant III. While four clones of mutant B, three clones of mutant C, eight of mutant D and one of mutant E were identified, cDNA clones corresponding to neither m4-type RNA3 nor the strictly wild- The sequences of RNA3 in mutants B, C and D revealed recombination between RNA3 and RNA1 or RNA2 at a site in their homologous 3' end region. As these RNAs differ in only a small number of bases in this region (see Fig. 4 legend), the exact site of putative recombination could not be specified. We can conclude, however, that mutant B is a combination ofRNA3 and RNA1 somewhere between bases 130 and 101, mutant C combines the RNA3 and RNA1 sequences somewhere between bases 175 and 131, and mutant D combines RNA3 and RNA2 somewhere between bases 205 and 101. Similar to mutant A, mutant E had its deleted stem-and-Ioop region restored and was larger than wild-type RNA3. Sequence analysis showed that the region corresponding to the last 206 bases of the wild-type RNA3 had been replaced by 215 3'-terrninal nucleotides from wild-type RNA2 (see Fig. 4 ). The structure of these five mutants suggests strongly that one or more recombination events have occurred between the 3'noncoding regions (within or outside the homologous sequences) of individual BMV RNAs, resulting in the restoration of the deleted hairpin in progeny RNA3. Clearly, that stem-andloop region is not essential for infectivity but its presence nevertheless confers a selective advantage. In mutants A and E recombination outside the closely homologous region resulted in emergent noncoding regions larger than wild-type RNA3, indicating that a degree of structural variability is permissible there. In mutants B, C and D the recombination event(s) occurred within the homologous region and resulted in sequences of wild-type lengths only. The results described here demonstrate that recombination between viral RNAs occurs in plant cells at a relatively high frequency and at various positions on the RNA. As with animal RNA viruses, the mechanism of recombination between the BMV sequences is unknown. Two diverse mechanisms have been suggested for RNA genomes: (1) Enzymatic cutting and re-ligation. (2) A 'copy-choice', during replication, between adventitiously proximal templates. The latter mechanism has been favoured for recombination in picornaviruses 24 , negativestrand viruses 5 ,10 and alpha viruses 7 . The recent discoveries of remarkable sequence similarities among encoded proteins of diverse plant RNA viruses 25 ,26 suggest that recombination may be a common phenomenon during synthesis of plant viruses. Like other processes of natural mutagenesis, recombination between plant viruses may render the progeny more adaptable to new environments or hosts. Conversely, RNA recombination between plant viral RNAs may be important for the preservation and stabilization of crucial functional sequences of multipartite genome viruses. Because it facilitates the association of unrelated genes, recombination also represents an attractive candidate for the mechanism of origin of viruses and for the insertion of new genes into existing viruses. We thank Ola Dzianott-Bujarska for technical assistance, and G. Duke, P. Shaklee and P. Ahlquist for valuable advice with respect to cDNA cloning. This work was supported by NIH research grants AI01466 and AI15342 and Career Award AI21942. • The mRNA corresponding to PROB 12 occurs at a low level in healthy tobacco, is not induced by treatment with salicylic acid, but is strongly induced by TMV infection. This mRNAis estimated to be 1,000-1,100 nucleotides long. Sequencing studies showed that the insert in PROB 12 is 845 base pairs (bp) long. As no poly(A) tract was found in the cDNA, the 3' end of the mRNA is probably not represented in the clone. Figure 2 shows that the insert contains an open reading frame for a protein of 226 amino acids, flanked by 5'-and 3'-noncoding regions of 3 and 164 nucleotides, respectively. The nucleotide sequence of the insert of PROB 12 was compared, by computer analysis, with plant sequences stored in a databank (Genbank). Extensive homology was found with the mRNA for thaumatin, the sweet-tasting protein that occurs in the arils of Thaumatococcus daniellii Benth, a West African shrub 7 • At least five different forms of thaumatin (I, II, III, b and c) can be isolated, all of which are almost 100,000 times sweeter than sucrose on a molar basis 8 • The most abundant forms are thaumatin I and II, polypeptides of 207 amino acids each that differ at only five positions 9 • The mature protein is derived from preprothaumatin by removal of an amino-terminal signal peptide of 22 amino acids and an acidic carboxy-terminal extension of 6 amino acids 7 • In Fig. 3 , preprothaumatin II is aligned with protein encoded by PROB 12; the amino-acid sequence homology between the two proteins is 65%. In addition, there are several conserved amino-acid changes; when these are taken into account, the homology is more than 70%. The Ala-Ala sequence, which represents the site of cleavage of the signal peptide, is conserved in both proteins. However, except for their hydrophobic nature, there is little similarity between the signal peptides of the two proteins, and the tobacco protein lacks the C-terminal extension of the thaumatin precursor. Because of its homology to thaumatin, we provisionally refer to the PROB 12-encoded protein as a thaumatin-like (or TL) protein of tobacco. The alignment shown in Fig. 3 suggests that PROB 12 contains the complete coding region for the precursor of the TL protein. A possible polyadenylation signal in TL mRNA (underlined in Fig. 1) is located 80 bp upstream from the 3' end of the eDNA insert. There may be additional polyadenylation signals in the TL mRNA sequence that are not represented in PROB 12. Three potential polyadenylation signals have been found in thaumatin mRNA7. The relative molecular mass (Mr) of the mature TL protein of tobacco is 21,596. It is unknown whether the TL protein 