Supplemental Materials Early detection of change patterns in COVID-19 incidence and the implementation of public health policies: a multi-national study Blinded copy
empty
A main mathematical model used in studying COVID-19 data is the traditional mathematical infectious disease model known as the "susceptible (S), infected (I), and recovered (R)" model, or SIR model 1 and its variations, such as stochastic SIR models, for the purpose of determining the total numbered of infected, the reproductive number, R0, etc. SIR models are powerful and used for implied purposes. We propose an innovative analytic approach by applying statistical change point models, which have been previously employed to model volatility in stock markets, to detect changes in genomic data and data dynamics in other scientific disciplines, to segment the transformed case data. This allowed us to identify possible change or turning points as indicated by the dynamics of daily COVID-19 incidences. Specifically, our analytic approach consisted of two parts. The first was to use a B-spline model 2 to estimate the trend of the original cases (say cases at day , = 1, … , , where n is the number of days available in the particular country's data). The spline regression models are traditional nonparametric methods used in trend fitting of data. The B-splines are constructed from polynomial pieces joined by some points called knots (indicated by blue vertical lines in panel A of all figures). These knots are determined by a model selection criterion so that piecewise local polynomials between the knots can together give the best prediction of the overall trend of the incidences. These knots, however, are not necessarily the statistical change points of the trend.
model, 3 which is the second part of our analytics. The daily incidences in many countries have shown different moving average with varying dispersion (volatility) over different period, indicating piecewise changing mean and variance. Therefore, a statistical change point model is a natural choice for identifying change points in the mean and variance of the data. The model assumes that the data are approximately normally distributed. To satisfy this assumption, we first transformed the number of cases to a normally distributed number of cases (say with = ? + 3/8). While the probability distribution of the coronavirus cases ( 's) can be assumed to be Poisson, 4 the transformed values 's are approximately normal. 5 For situations when the mean and variance change point is not able to detect any change points due to the reasons such as the transformed data may actually deviate from the normality assumption or the changes in mean and variance were not exactly piecewise, we used a Bayesian Note that at the time of this analysis, the WHO data had some negative new cases reported for a few countries; those negative case numbers were replaced by 0. In the European region, Turkey had its first COVID-19 confirmed case on March 11, and in the next few days, the case numbers lingered in single digits, but picked up quickly thereafter. Turkey instituted travel restrictions and other measures (e.g., public education about hygienic measures such as hand washing) to control the spread of the epidemic. 8, 9 The first change point occurred on March 26 followed by an increasing trend (Supplemental Figure 5) . It was observed that on and after March 26, transportation by air, bus, train etc. were restricted by the Turkey government's policy. 10 The cases continued to increase until April 26 (the second change point in Supplemental Figure 5 ) where a slow downturn point was observed. The downturn was slow moving and continued to linger, evidenced by the 95% CI of (1182,1604) ( Table 2) , for Turkey from April 27 to June 5. Our analysis of the COVID-19 case data of two other countries in the Americas region, Canada and Mexico, revealed that Canada saw a gradually flattened curve after three change points observed in March and April (Supplemental Figure 6 ) and Mexico still saw an increasing trend after May 11 th (Supplemental Figure 7) . The 95% CI for each of these two countries from the last detected change date (see Table 1 ) to June 5 shows the similar situation (see Table 2 ). In the region of Africa, thirteen nations with close ties to China, including Kenya, South Africa, and Nigeria, were identified as high-risk priority zones for proactive surveillance, detection and containing the spread of COVID-19. 11 Kenya introduced mandatory screening at all ports of entry, and established isolation facilities and a rapid response team to handle suspected cases. 11 Analysis of Kenya's incidence data of Kenya demonstrated two spikes (after the first two change points, see Supplemental Figure 8 ) with the second spike higher than the first one and the cases were lingering around 20 beyond May 11 th . South Africa assigned 300 health officials to ports of entry and began screening all travelers from China. In addition, national and provincial response teams were set up in South Africa. 11 Nigeria showed a worse picture than Kenya and the cases beyond May 11 th were still rising (see Supplemental Figure 9 ). Likewise, the cases in South Africa still demonstrated an upwards trend (see Supplemental Figure 10 ). The last CI for each of these three countries was wider in the last period from the last detected change date to June 5 than the previous period (see Table 2 ) indicates the upward trend for each of them and stricter policy made need to be implemented in order to flatten the curve in these countries. In the Eastern Mediterranean region, the cases in Iran peaked between March 2 and April 10, then started a downtrend thereafter but was moving towards a predicted upward direction after April 17 (the third change point, see Supplemental Figure 11 ). The last CI for Iran from April 18 to June 5 ranges from 1,431 to 1,865 cases, showing an upward trend for Iran (see Table 2 ). Saudi Arabia instituted travel restrictions and other measures (e.g., public education about hygienic measures such as hand washing) to control the spread of the epidemic. 8, 9 The cases in Saudi Arabia had a slow increasing trend until April 16, and quickly picked up an upward trend thereafter (see Supplemental Figure 12 ). The CI for the average case number from April 17 to June 5 ranges from 1,479 to 1,862 cases (see Table 2 ) indicating a continuing upward trend. Table 2 . The cases in Singapore were contained very well in early months from January to mid-March, a gradual increase trend was seen after March 16 (the first green vertical line, see Supplemental Figure 18 ), the trend progressed until April 13 and beyond April 16 it took a steeper upward trend. The trend is predicted to continue to progress with 3-digit numbers beyond May 11 th and the last CI for the period from April 17 to June 5, (591, 707) (see Table 2 ) confirms this observation. Supplemental Figure 1  