Title: Labour analgesia in COVID-19 positive parturients: points to ponder!
Rohan Magoon, Nitin Choudhary, Kirti Saxena
empty
To the Editor, Amid the range of theoretical-to-practical concerns of varying significances, most of the working obstetric-guidelines propose the safety of neuraxial anaesthesia in COVID-19 positive parturients, particularly at the bet of avoiding higher risk of aerosol generation associated with general anaesthesia in the context of emergency caesarean-sections [1] [2] [3] . Nevertheless, these patients additionally classify as potential candidates for labour analgesia for safe conduct of normal vaginal delivery. While an epidural registers as the gold-standard of labour analgesia, the circumstantial decision-making on the relative risk-benefit profile of labour epidural in a COVID-19 patient can be precarious in view of the peculiarities such as: 1. Thrombocytopenia, initially reported in almost one-third COVID-19 patients and associated with thrice the risk of a severe underlying infection in accordance with a recent meta-analysis [1] [2] [3] . Despite the limited data on thrombocytopenia in pregnancy, a declining platelet-count poses a certain obstetric anaesthesiologist's dilemma. infection [4, 5] can potentially aggravate the pregnancy-associated hypercoagulable state. Anticoagulants being administered in such circumstances, present obvious 3. Epidural-associated pyrexia, manifests with an elevated incidence of two and a half times with labour epidural analgesia. Quite interestingly, Mullington et al red-flag a heightened possibility of the aforementioned with the institution of early labour epidurals as proposed by Bauer and colleagues [1, 6] . Needless to say, an ongoing COVID-19 related systemic inflammatory state predisposes to greater temperature surges in the parturients [4, 6, 7] . While the causal association of such pyrexic responses with the subsequent poor neonatal neurological outcome continues to be ardently debated [8] , the possible links should not be overlooked particularly in face of an exasperated pyrexia resulting from COVID-19 [1, 6] . 4 . Timing of epidural catheter placement, if significantly prefixed increases the odds of intrapartum pyrexia, furthermore. This counters the commonly cited advantage of respiratory-exacerbation avoidance owing to an early labour epidural [6] . J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f 5. Technical issues, emanate while wearing personal protective equipment, presenting challenges to the best in business. To add to it, there is always a theoretical possibility of viremic-blood seeding the epidural/subarachnoid space, to result in meningitis/encephalitis [1] [2] [3] . It is noteworthy that the constellation of the abovementioned concerns in the most highrisk patients can even preclude a safe neuraxial analgesic approach. While the alternatives such as an inhalational Entonox-based labour analgesia are limited by aerosol generation risk, the other pharmacological modalities like opioids and non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are not without their risks of respiratory depression and accentuation of the COVID-19 disease process, respectively [1] [2] [3] . Moreover, the compounding factors including metabolic derangements and COVID-19 related endorgan dysfunction make the matter even worse [4, 5, 7, 9] . Such circumstances constitute enterprises for the consideration of the nonpharmacological labour analgesic modalities. The non-pharmacological analgesic techniques may be used include: psychotherapy, acupuncture, water bath, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, continuous support, massage and intradermal sterile water block (ISBW) combined with pudendal nerve block (for second stage of labour) [10, 11] . Therefore, the attending obstetric anaesthesiologist needs to meticulously gauge the context to reach an appropriate case-based decision on the suitability of the performance and timing of labour epidural analgesia in COVID-19 positive parturients [6, 10, 11] . In the situations ill-suited to labour epidural, resorting to the safer non-pharmacological options can be instrumental in ensuring an uninterrupted provision of labour analgesic services even to the highest risk COVID-19 parturients. This is aligned with the highest priority goal to err on the side of caution while battling the intriguing viral enemy. On a positive note, the adaptations we endorse during these desperate times may eventually turn out much to the welfare of the obstetric population well beyond the pandemic. 