Protocol of a network meta-analysis on the comparative efficacy of family interventions for psychotic disorders Complete List of Authors
: Laskowski, Alina 
Introduction: Family interventions are effective and are strongly recommended for psychotic disorders. However, there is a variety of intervention types and their differential efficacy is widely unclear. The aim of the planned network meta-analysis is to compare the efficacy of family interventions that differ in content (e.g. psychoeducation, mutual support, skills training) and setting (e.g. duration, inclusion of patient, form of delivery). Methods and analysis: We will include randomized controlled trials comparing psychosocial interventions directed at the adult relatives, friends, or non-professional carers of people with a diagnosis of a psychotic disorder (schizophrenia spectrum) to any kind of control condition. The main outcome will be global clinical state for the patients and coping with psychosis as well as attitudes towards psychosis for the relatives. Additional outcomes will be severity of symptoms, functioning, burden, and compliance/drop-out. We will conduct a comprehensive search of CENTRAL, MEDLINE(R), PsycINFO, CINAHL, and reference lists of previous review articles. Full-text assessment of eligibility, data extraction, and risk of bias assessment will be done by two independent reviewers. A network meta-analysis will be conducted for any of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The analyses will make use of a random effects model within a frequentist framework. Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk ratios for binary outcomes. Interventions will be ranked according to their relative efficacy. We will address the assumption of transitivity, heterogeneity, and inconsistency using theoretical and statistical approaches. The possibility of publication bias and the strength of evidence will also be examined. Ethics and dissemination: There are no ethical concerns.
I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in this journal and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence. The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("APC") for Open Access articles. Where the Submitting Author wishes to make the Work available on an Open Access basis (and intends to pay the relevant APC), the terms of reuse of such Open Access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence -details of these licences and which Creative Commons licence will apply to this Work are set out in our licence referred to above. Other than as permitted in any relevant BMJ Author's Self Archiving Policies, I confirm this Work has not been accepted for publication elsewhere, is not being considered for publication elsewhere and does not duplicate material already published. I confirm all authors consent to publication of this Work and authorise the granting of this licence. available treatment is antipsychotic drug therapy. However, because of unsatisfactory response, problems with adherence and disabling side-effects [1, 2] the focus has begun to switch more towards psychosocial interventions. Family interventions are one of two psychosocial therapies strongly recommended in recent clinical practice guidelines [3] [4] [5] . The relatives of people with psychotic disorders play an important role in the course of the disorder. High levels of expressed emotions (EE), i.e. criticism, hostility, and emotional overinvolvement expressed by the family [6] , were shown to be a reliable predictor of relapse in numerous studies [7] . Additionally, relatives are often the primary caregivers of patients with psychosis and are thus generally considered "important in the process of assessment and engagement in treatment and also in the successful delivery of effective interventions and therapies for people with psychotic disorders" [4; British NICE guidelines, p. 28]. As a result, attempts were made to positively influence the course of psychotic disorders by improving its management within the patients' families. However, caring for a person with a psychotic disorder is often a heavy burden and relatives face considerable emotional, social, and economical challenges [8] [9] [10] . These stressful conditions are likely not only to affect the well-being of the relatives, but also to limit their long-term ability to support the patient. Therefore, reducing the burden of care and enhancing the wellbeing of carers has become an additional focus of family interventions. Extensive research has been done on family interventions' efficacy. Previous meta-analyses have found family interventions to substantially and consistently reduce relapse and rehospitalization rates at follow-up assessments (RR ? 0.5-0.8) [4, [11] [12] [13] . Symptom severity and social functioning also show slight improvements, although the evidence base is less solid (SMD ? 0.3-0.4) [4, 13] . Regarding caregivers' outcomes, the most profound finding seems to be a significantly reduced amount of high EE families and a reduced burden of care [13, 14] . One well-known limiting factor of the evidence base and the delivering of efficacious family interventions is their great variability regarding content, aims, and format [3, 12, 15] . Pharoa et al. [13] list seven different strategies of family interventions and Lobban et al. [15] [16] [17] [18] [19] . All of them found evidence for the specific interventions' efficacy, albeit in regard to different outcomes and follow-up periods. One meta-analysis differentiated between cognitivebehavioral, purely behavioral, and "pragmatic" family interventions and found no difference in regard to relapse [20] . For recent-onset psychosis, a meta-analysis found mutual support to be more effective than psychoeducation in improving family functioning 1 to 2 years after the intervention [14] . However, this analysis was only based on two studies that had directly compared these approaches. In a systematic review of RCTs on outcomes for relatives of people with psychotic disorders, none of the content components or types assigned to the studies (e.g. psychoeducation only, psychoeducation plus mutual support, psychoeducation plus skills training) reliably distinguished effective from ineffective interventions [15] . Similarly, we are still in the dark about the ideal format of a family intervention. Some metaanalyses have calculated effects for subgroups of studies with specific formats. These indicate that more extensive interventions are more successful in reducing relapse [4, 12] and demonstrate that the positive evidence for family interventions is mainly based on interventions that include the patient [4] . Meta-analyses on studies that have directly compared interventions with a focus on single families versus multiple family groups did not find them to differ in terms of relapse, but suggest that working with single families is better accepted than group settings involving multiple families [4, 13] . The existing meta-analytic approaches have several limitations when it comes to evaluating the comparative efficacy of different intervention types: 1. The differentiation of intervention types is unclear. In addition to unclear descriptions in primary studies [15] , many interventions comprise a variety of different components. The definitions used in existing meta-analyses and reviews are diverse and often imprecise. 2. There are only few studies that directly compare different types of interventions and these have rarely been meta-analyzed. Most of the meta-analytic evidence is based on comparisons of a single intervention type to a non-intervention control condition. 3. There is a wide variety of outcome measures and time points. The specificity of previous meta-analyses and the diversity of findings make it difficult to compare and evaluate the efficacy of intervention types. 4 . For most of the intervention types the number of studies is small. E.g., many subgroup meta-analyses for specific formats are based on less than five studies [4, 13] . This results in imprecise effect size estimates and limits interpretation of significance. 5 . The differential effects of some important characteristics of family interventions (e.g. media-based vs. face-to-face formats) have not been investigated meta-analytically. Intervention: Family interventions, defined as any psychosocial intervention directed at the relatives, spouses/partners, friends or non-professional carers of people with a psychotic disorder, will be included. In complex interventions with different treatment elements, a substantial part (i.e. at least 50% of the intervention, excluding standard care elements (as defined by the study)) has to include at least one relative, spouse/partner, friend or non-professional carer. The exact types and definitions of interventions to be compared in the analyses will depend on the distinct interventions and comparisons realized in the included studies and may be adjusted, amended, or lumped with respect to the included studies and the networks' homogeneity and consistency. The following categories were created after pilot screening of studies and in consideration of the classifications resulting from previous review articles [3, 12, 15, 27] : 1. Counseling and management: general support in organizational, social, or emotional issues. 2. Mutual support: bringing relatives together to talk about their experiences and support each other. 3 . Psychoeducation: providing manualized information on the psychotic disorder, its treatment, or ways of coping. 4 . Skills training: learning and application of predefined skills to enhance coping with the patient or own distress (e.g. regarding communication, problem solving, stress management). 5 . Individual psychological therapy: in-depth work on individual problems using psychological (e.g. systemic, cognitive, or psychodynamic) approaches. Duration: short (1-10 sessions) vs. medium (11-30 sessions) vs. long (>30 sessions). Inclusion of the patient: in no session vs. in some sessions vs. in all sessions.  Randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials, defined according to the Cochrane Handbook [28] , will be included. In randomized controlled trials (RCT), "the author(s) state explicitly (usually by some variant of the term 'random' to describe the allocation procedure used) that the groups compared in the trial were established by random allocation". In quasi-RCTs, "the method of allocation is known but is not considered strictly random … Examples of quasi-random methods of assignment include alternation, date of birth, and medical record number" (Box 6.3a). Cluster RCTs will be included, but excluded in sensitivity analyses. Due to the diversity of measures and the necessity to divide and compare subgroups of studies, eligible outcomes will have to cover a variety of measures to allow the inclusion of a sufficient number of studies. The outcomes were selected and defined in consideration of previous reviews and pilot screening of studies. However, here too, the definitions may be refined during study selection and data extraction based on the specific measures used in the included studies. The most commonly reported measures of family interventions' efficacy will serve as main outcomes: For people with psychotic disorders: Global clinical state, including any quantification of relapse, hospitalization, crisis care service use, or remission/recovery, as defined by the study. Coping and attitudes, including e.g. any quantification of EE, communicative or problem solving skills, family functioning, understanding of the person's feelings, knowledge of psychosis, or beliefs and attitudes towards the illness. Severity of symptoms, including average change or endpoint scores in observer rating scales or self-report questionnaires concerning psychotic symptoms or overall mental health. Functioning, including any quantification of global, social, or occupational functioning, living skills, or symptom management. Burden, including average change or endpoint scores in observer rating scales or self-report questionnaires concerning subjective or objective burden of care, emotional response (e.g. stress, anxiety, depression), mental health, well-being, or quality of life. Compliance/Drop-out, including any quantification of relatives leaving the study early for any reason. The measures within the outcome categories were sorted according to how well they represent the respective category heading, i.e. the concept of interest, and how common they are. Broad questionnaires or rating scales that cover further domains than those of interest are included if a major part (at least 50%) pertains to the domain of interest. If a study reports multiple eligible outcome measures with sufficient information for effect size calculation, the measure for inclusion will be selected based on the following criteria which were developed to maximize validity and homogeneity of study outcomes: (a) For multiple measures within the same outcome category, measures will be preferred according to the order they are listed above (e.g. for global clinical state, our first preference will be measures of relapse, if these are not reported we will include measures of hospitalization, then measures of crisis care service use and then measures indicating the extent of remission or recovery). (b) For multiple time points, the most commonly reported will be determined among the included studies. These time points or the ones that are closest to them will be preferred. (c) For multiple methods of assessment, again the most commonly reported will be determined and preferred for inclusion. (d) For multiple samples, the one with the most comprehensive and adequate outcomes orif outcomes are equivalent -the largest N will be preferred. The criteria may be adjusted if this is required based on the included studies. If no single outcome measure can be determined based on these criteria, a composite effect will be calculated (e.g. for separate scales of positive and negative psychotic symptoms). The procedure of calculating a composite effect will follow the proposals made by Borenstein et al. [29] . Reports will have to include an English abstract to evaluate eligibility in a first step. No further report characteristics, e.g. regarding publication date, status, or language, will restrict inclusion. Foreign language articles will be translated. If there are multiple reports referring to the same study of which at least one presents comprehensive information for our analyses in English, the reports in other languages will not be considered due to limited resources. The bibliographic databases The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Ovid MEDLINE(R), Ovid PsycINFO, and CINAHL will be searched. There will be no limit regarding year of publication, except that Ovid MEDLINE(R) ( Additionally, the reference lists of the most relevant, recent and comprehensive review articles will be screened to identify articles possibly missed by the computerized search. Reviews will be identified by the above searches and by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. Bibliographic data of all articles retrieved by the search will be imported into the reference management software ZOTERO. They will be de-duplicated using the tool of the Systematic Review Accelerator by the Centre for Research in Evidence-Based Practice (http://crebp-sra.com/#/), which was found to have good sensitivity and specificity [30] , and additional manual screening. Titles and abstracts of the remaining articles and the additional articles identified from reference lists will be screened by the first author to identify studies that potentially meet the inclusion criteria. Of those, the full texts will be consulted. We will try to identify overlapping samples and multiple articles/reports of the same study by comparing e.g. author names, study sites, sample sizes, demographical and clinical data, treatment descriptions, and results. Eligibility of each study will be assessed independently by two review team members and documented in an adapted version of the Cochrane data collection form (intervention reviews -RCTs only). Discrepancies will be identified and a consensus will be formed by discussion, including a third review team member where necessary. In the case of major unclarities we will attempt to obtain additional information from previous reviews that included the study or from the study authors if there is an accurate email address available. An adapted version of the Cochrane data collection form (intervention review -RCTs only) will be used for data extraction. Two review team members will extract data independently, discrepancies will be resolved through discussion, including the third review team member where -ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   9 necessary. In the case of missing data or unclear study information, we will again consult previous review articles or -if an accurate email address is available -ask the study authors to provide the relevant information on the intervention characteristics and outcome data. Extracted information will include: (1) Characteristics of the study: year, country of origin, institutional setting, design, trial registration number. (2) Characteristics of the article(s): authors, status, and year of publication. (3) Characteristics of the sample: number randomized per group (or description of clusters), number and reasons missing, sex, age a. for patients: diagnoses, diagnostic criteria, baseline symptom severity, duration of disorder, specificities (e.g. regarding symptomatology, stage of the disorder, medication). b. for relatives: threshold of baseline dysfunction/distress for inclusion, specificities  Risk of bias in individual studies will be assessed using the Version 2 of the Cochrane risk-ofbias tool for randomized trials (RoB 2) [31] . This recently developed tool uses signaling questions and an algorithm to help making judgments of "low risk", "some concerns", or "high risk" related to five domains: (1) bias arising from the randomization process; (1b) additionally for cluster RCTs: Bias arising from identification or recruitment of individual participants within clusters;  (2) bias due to deviations from intended interventions; (3) bias due to missing outcome data; (4) bias in measurement of the outcome; (5) bias in selection of the reported result. Additionally, an overall risk of bias will be determined by the tool's algorithm. The assessment will be done separately for each trial's outcome and with respect to the assignment to the intervention (intention-to-treat effect). Two trained review team members will independently answer the signaling questions using the available Excel form. Disagreements will be identified with the discrepancy check function and will be resolved by discussion, involving the third review team member where necessary. As high risks of bias may result in an overestimation of family interventions' efficacy, studies with overall high risk will be excluded from the sensitivity analyses. A network meta-analysis will be conducted for each of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The R package netmeta will be used. Analyses will apply a random effects model within a frequentist framework. We will assume a constant heterogeneity across the comparisons within a network. A network model will be used to display the intervention types (as nodes) and the quantity of evidence for all possible treatment comparisons (as connecting lines). Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences (SMDs) for continuous outcomes and risk ratios (RRs) for binary outcomes, both with their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The effects will be displayed in a league table. Interventions will be ranked using P-scores, a frequentist analogue to the Surface Under the Cumulative Ranking curve (SUCRA) [32] . Some interventions may have several distinct content components. If there is appropriate data, the influence of the individual components will be evaluated in an additive network meta-analysis model, assuming that the effect of an intervention with several components is the sum of the effects of its individual components [33] . Network meta-analyses are based on the assumption of transitivity that implies that the effect of treatment A vs. B can be indirectly determined via a common treatment C. For this assumption to hold, trials that investigate different types of interventions need to be comparable in regard to clinical or methodological variables that may influence the treatment effect. However, the intervention types we plan to investigate may not be independent of each other. E.g. psychoeducative interventions may be systematically shorter than other content types, which would threaten the transitivity of the NMA  F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   NETWORK META-ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   11 for content and duration. Other potential effect modifiers are participant or outcome characteristics. E.g., the type of family intervention might differ depending on whether parents of young patients or informal caregivers of older patients are involved, or interventions with more sessions may report on outcomes with longer follow-up periods. To evaluate the likelihood of transitivity, the distribution of potential effect modifiers will be compared between trials of different intervention types and investigated for similarity [22] . Characteristics for investigation will include: 1. intervention characteristics: content of the intervention, duration, inclusion of the patient, form of delivery; 2. existence of co-treatments exclusively for patients (above treatment as usual); 3. baseline symptom severity (PANSS or BPRS score at baseline); 4. age of patients; 5. duration of illness; 6. baseline dysfunction/distress of relatives (studies that selected participants for being above a defined threshold of clinically significant dysfunction/distress). Regarding outcome characteristics, such as type and time point of measurement, we aim to maximize the chance of transitivity by selecting homogeneous measures if multiple outcomes for inclusion are reported (see Outcomes). Transitivity will also be addressed by assessing the consistency of direct and indirect evidence [34] , with both local and global methods [21, 35] . Locally, the inconsistency of a specific treatment comparison will be evaluated by splitting the network estimate into the contribution of direct and indirect evidence and checking for agreement. Global heterogeneity of the network will be assessed using a generalized Q-and I 2 -statistic [36] . A decomposition into Q-statistics for heterogeneity within designs (i.e. studies with the same treatment comparisons) and between designs will help identify sources of heterogeneity and to evaluate the inconsistency of the network as a whole. We will examine the possibility of publication bias by non-statistical considerations [37] and calculations of 'comparison-adjusted' funnel plots to assess funnel plot asymmetry [38] . The strength of evidence for the cumulative estimates of the main outcomes will be evaluated according to the proposals made by Salanti et al. [37] , who adapted the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework (GRADE) specifically for network meta-analysis. This extensive approach may be adapted to the data and resources available.  We will perform sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of findings. In subgroup analyses, studies with an overall high risk of bias and cluster RCTs will be excluded. If there is evidence that the assumption of transitivity is threatened within a network, we will try to increase consistency and homogeneity by adjusting the categories (nodes) of the network or by performing separate network meta-analyses for distinct characteristics of potential effect modifiers. E.g., regarding the interventions' duration, there may be separate analyses for studies with a focus on psychoeducation and studies with other foci. Patients or the public will not be involved in the design or conduct of the study. However, the EmPeeRie (Empower Peers to Research) Now group at the UKE (Outpatient Clinic at the University of Hamburg) will consult on issues concerning reporting, interpretation, and dissemination of findings. The EmPeeRie Now group consists of members with lived experience of mental illness, with multiple members having lived experience in psychosis. There are no ethical issues apparent. Results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and be presented at practitioners' congresses. Full data will be made available upon request. AL and TL designed this study in close cooperation. AL drafted the protocol and final manuscript, TL revised and approved it. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors. The authors do not have any competing interests. I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in BMJ Open and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence. The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article publishing charge ("APC") for Open Access articles. Where the Submitting Author wishes to make the Work available on an Open Access basis (and intends to pay the relevant APC), the terms of reuse of such Open Access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence -details of these licences and which Creative Commons licence will apply to this Work are set out in our licence referred to above. Retrieved from https://www.awmf.org/leitlinien/detail/ll/038-009.html #11b State the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis) 8 Study records -data collection process #11c Describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate), any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators 8-9 Data items #12 List and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as PICO items, funding sources), any pre-planned data assumptions and simplifications 9 Outcomes and prioritization #13 List and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes, with rationale 6-7 individual studies #14 Describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis Data synthesis #15a Describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised 10-11 Data synthesis #15b If data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of consistency (such as I2, Kendall's ô) Data synthesis #15c Describe any proposed additional analyses (such as sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression) 12 disorders. However, there is a variety of intervention types and their differential efficacy is widely unclear. The aim of the planned network meta-analysis is to compare the efficacy of family interventions that differ in content (e.g. psychoeducation, mutual support, skills training) and setting (e.g. number of sessions, inclusion of patient, form of delivery). Methods and analysis: We will include randomized controlled trials comparing psychosocial interventions directed at the adult relatives, friends, or non-professional carers of people with a diagnosis of a psychotic disorder (schizophrenia spectrum) to any kind of control condition. The main outcome will be global clinical state for the patients and coping with psychosis as well as attitudes towards psychosis for the relatives. Additional outcomes will be severity of symptoms, functioning, burden, and compliance/drop-out. We conducted a comprehensive search of CENTRAL, MEDLINE(R), PsycINFO, CINAHL (08/08/2019), and reference lists of review articles. Full-text assessment of eligibility, data extraction, and risk of bias assessment will be done by two independent reviewers. A network meta-analysis will be conducted for any of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The analyses will make use of a random effects model within a frequentist framework. Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk ratios for dichotomous outcomes. Interventions will be ranked according to their relative efficacy. We will address the assumption of transitivity, heterogeneity, and inconsistency using theoretical and statistical approaches. The possibility of publication bias and the strength of evidence will also be examined. Ethics and dissemination: There are no ethical concerns. Results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at practitioners' conferences. The study has been registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42020148728). ? Network meta-analysis (NMA) will provide new information on the efficacy of different types of family interventions for psychotic disorders. ? It will enable comparisons and increase the precision of effect estimates. ? It will possibly result in a ranking of interventions types that can inform guidelines for clinical practice. ? Diversity of studies may result in high amounts of heterogeneity or inconsistency, which will be addressed with theoretical and statistical approaches.  Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders are among the most severe mental disorders and cause immense suffering for millions of people and their families worldwide. The most widely available treatment is antipsychotic drug therapy. However, because of unsatisfactory response, problems with adherence, and disabling side-effects [1, 2] , the focus has begun to switch more towards psychosocial interventions. Family interventions are one of two psychosocial therapies strongly recommended in recent clinical practice guidelines [3] [4] [5] . The relatives of people with psychotic disorders play an important role in the course of the disorder. High levels of expressed emotions (EE), i.e. criticism, hostility, and emotional overinvolvement expressed by the family [6] , were shown to be a reliable predictor of relapse in numerous studies [7] . Additionally, relatives are often the primary caregivers of patients with psychosis and are thus generally considered "important in the process of assessment and engagement in treatment and also in the successful delivery of effective interventions and therapies for people with psychotic disorders" [4; British NICE guidelines, p. 28]. As a result, attempts were made to positively influence the course of psychotic disorders by improving its management within the patients' families. However, caring for a person with a psychotic disorder is often a heavy burden and relatives face considerable emotional, social, and economical challenges [8] [9] [10] . These stressful conditions are likely not only to affect the well-being of the relatives, but also to limit their long-term ability to support the patient. Therefore, reducing the burden of care and enhancing the wellbeing of carers has become an additional focus of family interventions. Extensive research has been done on family interventions' efficacy. Previous meta-analyses have found family interventions to substantially and consistently reduce relapse and rehospitalization rates at follow-up assessments (RR ? 0.5-0.8) [4, [11] [12] [13] . Symptom severity and social functioning also show slight improvements, although the evidence base is less solid (SMD ? 0.3-0.4) [4, 13] . Regarding caregivers' outcomes, the most profound finding seems to be a significantly reduced amount of high EE families and a reduced burden of care [13, 14] . One well-known limiting factor of the evidence base and the delivering of efficacious family interventions is their great variability regarding content, aims, and format [3, 12, 15] . Pharoa et al. [13] list seven different strategies of family interventions and Lobban et al. [15] [17] ), from training of communication and problem-solving skills (e.g. the Behavioural Family Therapy [18] ) to mutual support groups [19] , and from a few sessions to years of support. Despite the variety in the content of interventions, we still know little about whether some approaches are more effective than others. Separate meta-analyses have been conducted on specific types of interventions, such as psychoeducation, psychoeducation plus skills training, and systemic therapy [20] [21] [22] [23] . All of them found evidence for the specific interventions' efficacy, albeit in regard to different outcomes and follow-up periods. One meta-analysis differentiated between cognitivebehavioral, purely behavioral, and "pragmatic" family interventions and found no difference in regard to relapse [24] . For recent-onset psychosis, a meta-analysis found mutual support to be more effective than psychoeducation in improving family functioning 1 to 2 years after the intervention [14] . However, this analysis was only based on two studies that had directly compared these approaches. In a systematic review of RCTs on outcomes for relatives of people with psychotic disorders, none of the content components or types assigned to the studies (e.g. psychoeducation only, psychoeducation plus mutual support, psychoeducation plus skills training) reliably distinguished effective from ineffective interventions [15] . Similarly, we are still in the dark about the ideal format of a family intervention. Some metaanalyses have calculated effects for subgroups of studies with specific formats. These indicate that more extensive interventions are more successful in reducing relapse [4, 12] and demonstrate that the positive evidence for family interventions is mainly based on interventions that include the patient [4] . Meta-analyses on studies that have directly compared interventions with a focus on single families versus multiple family groups did not find them to differ in terms of relapse, but suggest that working with single families is better accepted than group settings involving multiple families [4, 13] . The existing meta-analytic approaches have several limitations when it comes to evaluating the comparative efficacy of different intervention types: 1. The differentiation of intervention types is unclear. In addition to unclear descriptions in primary studies [15] , many interventions comprise a variety of different components. The definitions used in existing meta-analyses and reviews are diverse and often imprecise. There are only few studies that directly compare different types of interventions and these have rarely been meta-analysed. Most of the meta-analytic evidence is based on comparisons of a single intervention type to a non-intervention control condition. 3. There is a wide variety of outcome measures and time points. The specificity of previous meta-analyses and the diversity of findings make it difficult to compare and evaluate the efficacy of intervention types. 4 . For most of the intervention types the number of studies is small. E.g., many subgroup meta-analyses for specific formats are based on less than five studies [4, 13] . This results in imprecise effect size estimates and limits interpretation of significance. 5. The differential effects of some important characteristics of family interventions (e.g. media-based vs. face-to-face formats) have not yet been investigated meta-analytically. On this background it is still widely unclear whether there are significant differences in efficacy between different types of family interventions. This study aims to compare the types of family interventions in a systematic and consistent manner, using the method of network metaanalysis (NMA). NMA extends on classical meta-analysis because it allows to simultaneously compare multiple intervention types and to combine the evidence of direct comparisons with indirect comparisons to common control conditions [25, 26] . This enables us to evaluate the comparative efficacy of intervention types that have not yet been directly compared. Due to the possibility to include additional information, the efficacy can also be estimated more precisely [27] . Finally, all intervention types can be ranked according to their relative efficacy. This information could be of high value for patients, their families, as well as healthcare providers and may serve as a guideline for delivering the most efficacious interventions. Using NMA, this study aims to compare the efficacy of different types of family interventions for people with psychotic disorders and their relatives. Interventions will be differentiated by ? content (e.g. psychoeducation, mutual support, skills training) and ? setting (e.g. number of sessions, inclusion of patient, form of delivery). Methods for this NMA are based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) [28] , the PRISMA extension statement for reporting of systematic reviews incorporating NMA of healthcare interventions [29] , and the new chapter of the Cochrane Handbook on undertaking NMA [25] . The NMA has been registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42020148728); the record will be updated with any changes made to the protocol. To include a sufficient number of studies for the specific direct and indirect comparisons and to increase the connectivity of the networks, some of the eligibility criteria are more lenient than in traditional meta-analysis [30] . [31] and increase the amount of eligible studies and the generalizability of findings, all kinds of definitions and diagnostic procedures as well as all kinds of comorbid disorders will be accepted. Populations with subthreshold psychotic symptoms (e.g. highrisk populations) will be excluded. There will be no restrictions regarding the age as family interventions are also common in younger people/adolescents (e.g. first episode of psychosis). Samples also including people without psychotic but other diagnoses are eligible if most (at least 75%) of the patients are diagnosed with a psychotic disorder. If only broad categories of psychotic disorders in major classification systems, such as "Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders" in DSM-IV [32] or "Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders" in ICD-10 [33] are used to describe the diagnoses of the participants, we assume that at least 75% of the diagnoses are psychotic disorders as defined above. b. The relatives, spouses/partners, friends or non-professional carers of the people with psychotic disorders, as defined by the study. They have to be of an adult age, children of people with psychotic disorders will be excluded. Intervention: Family interventions, defined as any psychosocial intervention directed at the relatives, spouses/partners, friends or non-professional carers of people with a psychotic disorder, will be included. In complex interventions with different treatment elements, a substantial part (i.e. at least 50% of the intervention, excluding standard care (as defined by the study) or comparator elements) has to be directed at a relative, spouse/partner, friend or non-professional carer. The exact types and definitions of interventions to be compared in the analyses will depend on the distinct interventions and comparisons realized in the included studies and may be adjusted, If different types of family interventions are compared in a study, they have to differ in at least one of these categories because otherwise their comparison could not be included in the network. Comparator: Any kind of comparator will be included. The following classification of the comparator's content is also preliminary and may be adjusted through the process of study selection. So far it includes no treatment/waiting list vs. standard care/treatment as usual (as defined by the study) vs. psychosocial intervention for patients only (e.g. psychoeducation, cognitive-behavioral therapy, social skills training). Randomized controlled trials (RCT) will be included, defined according to the Cochrane definition as trials in which "the author(s) state explicitly (usually by some variant of the term 'random' to describe the allocation procedure used) that the groups compared in the trial were established by random allocation" [35] . Quasi-RCTs, cluster-RCTs, and crossover trials will be excluded. The outcomes were selected and defined in consideration of previous reviews, pilot screening of studies, and statistical properties. However, here too, the definitions may be refined during study selection and data extraction based on the specific measures used in the included studies. The most commonly reported measures of family interventions' efficacy will serve as main outcomes: Additional outcomes will be: Severity of symptoms, including average endpoint scores in observer rating scales or selfreport questionnaires concerning psychotic symptoms or overall mental health. Functioning, including any quantification of global, social, occupational functioning, or living skills. Burden, including average endpoint scores in observer rating scales or self-report questionnaires concerning subjective or objective burden of care, emotional response (e.g. stress, anxiety, depression), mental health, well-being, or quality of life. Compliance/Drop-out, including number of relatives leaving the study early for any reason since randomization. The measures within the outcome categories were sorted according to how well they represent the respective category heading, i.e. the concept of interest, and how common they are. Only established scales and subscales of questionnaires and rating scales for which reliability and validity have been examined are included. Broad questionnaires or rating scales that cover further domains than those of interest are included if a major part (at least 50%) pertains to the domain of interest. To be eligible, studies have to report numerical outcome data for the calculation of standardized mean differences (SMDs) for continuous outcomes and risk ratios (RRs) for dichotomous outcomes. Change scores will be excluded because the combined analysis with endpoint scores is not recommended when using SMDs [36] . If a study reports multiple eligible outcome measures with sufficient information for effect size calculation, the measure for inclusion will be selected based on the following criteria, which were developed to maximize validity and homogeneity of study outcomes: (a) For multiple measures within the same outcome category, measures will be preferred according to the order they are listed above (e.g. for global clinical state, our first preference will be measures of relapse, if these are not reported we will include measures of hospitalization, then measures of crisis care service use and then measures indicating the extent of remission or recovery). (b) For multiple time-points, outcomes at one year (after the beginning of intervention/baseline-assessment) or those closest to this time-point will be preferred. (c) For multiple methods of assessment (e.g. different scales), the most commonly reported will be determined among the included studies and these will be preferred for inclusion. In cases in which more than one outcome remains, the one with the best psychometric properties will be preferred. (d) For multiple samples, the one with the most comprehensive and adequate outcomes orif outcomes are equivalent -the largest N will be preferred. The criteria may be adjusted if this is required based on the included studies. If no single outcome measure can be determined based on these criteria, a composite effect will be calculated (e.g. for separate scales of positive and negative psychotic symptoms). The procedure of calculating a composite effect will follow the proposals made by Borenstein et al. [37] . Reports will have to include an English abstract to evaluate eligibility in a first step. Conference/congress abstracts and trial registrations without results will be excluded as these reports do not present sufficient data for the assessment of eligibility, especially regarding outcomes. However, we will try to identify more comprehensive publications for relevant trials (see Searches). Foreign language articles will be translated. If there are multiple reports referring to the same study of which at least one presents comprehensive information for our analyses in English, the reports in other languages will not be considered due to limited resources. The identified by the above searches and by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. We will also try to identify full reports of relevant trial registrations, study protocols, and congress abstracts as well as cross-references in primary articles. Bibliographic data of all articles retrieved by the search will be imported into the reference management software ZOTERO. They will be de-duplicated using the tool of the Systematic Review Accelerator by the Centre for Research in Evidence-Based Practice (http://crebp-sra.com/#/), which was found to have good sensitivity and specificity [38] , and additional manual screening. Titles and abstracts of the remaining articles and the additional articles identified from reference lists will be screened by the first author to identify studies that potentially meet the inclusion criteria. Of those, the full texts will be consulted. We will try to identify overlapping samples and multiple reports of the same study by comparing e.g. author names, study sites, sample sizes, demographical and clinical data, treatment descriptions, and results. Eligibility of each study will be assessed independently by two review team members and documented in an adapted version of the Cochrane data collection form (intervention reviews -RCTs only). Discrepancies will be identified and a consensus will be formed by discussion, including a third review team member where necessary. In the case of major unclarities we will attempt to obtain additional information from previous reviews that included the study or from the study authors if there is an accurate email address available. An adapted version of the Cochrane data collection form (intervention review -RCTs only) will be used for data extraction. Two review team members will extract data independently; discrepancies will be resolved through discussion, including the third review team member where necessary. In the case of missing data or unclear study information, we will again consult previous review articles or -if an accurate email address is available -ask the study authors to provide the relevant information on the intervention characteristics and outcome data. Extracted information will include: (1) Characteristics of the study: year, country of origin, institutional setting, design, trial registration number. (2) Characteristics of the article(s): authors, status, and year of publication. (3) Characteristics of the sample: number randomized per group, number and reasons missing, sex, age  Risk of bias in individual studies will be assessed using the Version 2 of the Cochrane risk-ofbias tool for randomized trials (RoB 2) [39] . This recently developed tool uses signaling questions and an algorithm to help making judgments of "low risk", "some concerns", or "high risk" related to five domains: (1) bias arising from the randomization process; (2) bias due to deviations from intended interventions; (3) bias due to missing outcome data; (4) bias in measurement of the outcome; (5) bias in selection of the reported result. Additionally, an overall risk of bias will be determined by the tool's algorithm. The assessment will be done for each trial's outcome and with respect to the assignment to the intervention (intention-to-treat effect). Two trained review team members will independently answer the signaling questions using the available Excel form. Disagreements will be identified with the discrepancy check function and will be resolved by discussion, involving the third review team member where necessary. As high risks of bias may result in an overestimation of family interventions' efficacy, studies with overall high risk will be excluded from the sensitivity analyses.  A network meta-analysis will be conducted for each of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The R package netmeta will be used. Analyses will apply a random effects model within a frequentist framework [40] . We will assume a constant heterogeneity across the comparisons within a network. A network plot will be used to display the intervention types (as nodes) and the quantity of evidence for all possible treatment comparisons (as connecting lines). Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences (SMDs) for continuous outcomes and risk ratios (RRs) for dichotomous outcomes, both with their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The effects will be displayed in a league  Diversity of the included populations, interventions, and outcomes may lead to statistical heterogeneity. This may also threaten the assumption of transitivity that implies that the effect of treatment A vs. B can be indirectly determined via a common treatment C. For this assumption to hold, trials that investigate different types of interventions need to be comparable in regard to clinical or methodological variables that may influence the treatment effect. However, the intervention types we plan to investigate may not be independent of each other. E.g., psychoeducative interventions may have fewer sessions than other content types, which would threaten the transitivity of the NMA for content and number of sessions. Other potential effect modifiers are participant or outcome characteristics. E.g., the type of family intervention might differ depending on the severity of the relatives' dysfunction/distress, which was found to be associated with the efficacy of interventions, or interventions with more sessions may report on outcomes with longer follow-up periods. To evaluate the likelihood of transitivity, the distribution of potential effect modifiers will be compared between trials of different intervention types and investigated for similarity [25, 43, 44] . Based on the Cochrane recommendations [36] , clinical hypotheses, and empirical evidence [4, 15] , characteristics for investigation will include: 1. intervention characteristics: content of the intervention, number of sessions, inclusion of the patient, form of delivery; 2. existence of co-treatments exclusively for patients (above treatment as usual);  Transitivity will also be addressed by assessing the consistency of direct and indirect evidence [30] , with both local and global methods [25, 43] . Locally, the inconsistency of a specific treatment comparison will be evaluated by splitting the network estimate into the contribution of direct and indirect evidence and checking for agreement. Global heterogeneity of the network will be assessed using a generalized Q-and I 2 -statistic [40] . A decomposition into Q-statistics for heterogeneity within designs (i.e. studies with the same treatment comparisons) and between designs will help identify sources of heterogeneity and to evaluate the inconsistency of the network as a whole. We  In sensitivity analyses, studies with an overall high risk of bias will be excluded. If there is evidence that the assumption of transitivity is threatened within a network (s. Diversity and transitivity), i.e. if there are significant differences between the distributions of potential effect modifiers, we will try to increase consistency and homogeneity by performing subgroup NMAs for the distinct manifestations of the potential effect modifiers. E.g., regarding the number of sessions, there may be separate analyses for studies with a focus on psychoeducation and studies with other foci.  There are no ethical issues apparent. Results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and be presented at practitioners' congresses. Full data will be made available upon request. AL and TL designed this study in close cooperation. AL drafted the protocol and final manuscript, TL revised and approved it. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors do not have any competing interests. I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in BMJ Open and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence. The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article or delusion* or paranoi* or hallucinat* or disorgani* or (thought adj1 (disorder* or disturb*))).ti. or (psychos#s or psychotic* or schizo*).jw. or (psychos#s or psychotic* or schizo*).bt. . ((Famil* or relatives or parent* or mother* or father* or spouse* or partner* or friend* or carer* or caring or caregiv* or expressed emotion?) adj6 (Intervention* or therap* or psychotherap* or psychodrama* or treatment* or management* or psychoeducat* or educat* or counsel* or coach* or support or help or program*3 or train*)).tw. 6. exp clinical trials/ or treatment effectiveness evaluation/ or random sampling/ or placebo/ or (random* or (controlled adj7 (study or design or trial)) or ((double or single or doubly or singly) adj (blind or blinded or blindly)) or (open adj label) or parallel group*1 or placebo or crossover or cross over or assigned or allocated or ((assign* or match or matched or allocation) adj5 (alternate or group*1 or intervention*1 or patient*1 or subject*1 or participant*1))).tw. or (compare or compared or comparison or trial).ti. or ((evaluated or evaluate or evaluating or assessed or assess) and (compare or compared or comparing or comparison)).ab. S5: TI ((famil* or relatives or parent* or mother* or father* or spouse* or partner* or friend* or carer* or caring or caregiv* or expressed emotion#) N6 (intervention* or therap* or psychotherap* or psychodrama* or treatment* or management* or psychoeducat* or educat* or counsel* or coach* or support or help or program* or train*)) or AB ((famil* or relatives or parent* or mother* or father* or spouse* or partner* or friend* or carer* or caring or caregiv* or expressed emotion#) N6 (Intervention* or therap* or psychotherap* or psychodrama* or treatment* or management* or psychoeducat* or educat* or counsel* or coach* or support or help or program* or train*)) S6: MH (exp clinical trial or random assignment or random sample or placebos) or TI (random* or (controlled N7 (study or design or trial)) or ((double or single or doubly or singly) W0 (blind or blinded or blindly)) or (open W0 label) or parallel group# or placebo or crossover or cross over or assigned or allocated or ((assign* or match or matched or allocation) N5 (alternate or group# or intervention# or patient# or subject# or participant#)) or compare or compared or comparison or trial) or AB (random* or (controlled N7 (study or design or trial)) or ((double or single or doubly or singly) W0 (blind or blinded or blindly)) or (open W0 label) or parallel group# or placebo or crossover or cross over or assigned or allocated or ((assign* or match or matched or allocation) N5 (alternate or group# or intervention# or patient# or subject# or participant#)) or ((evaluated or evaluate or evaluating or assessed or assess) and (compare or compared or comparing or comparison))) S7: S1 AND S2 AND S6 S8: S1 AND S3 AND S4 AND S6 S9: S1 AND S5 AND S6 S10: S7 OR S8 OR S9 Describe the mechanism(s) that will be used to manage records and data throughout the review 9 Study recordsselection process #11b State the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis) 9 Study records -data collection process #11c Describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate), any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators 9-10 Data items #12 List and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as PICO items, funding sources), any pre-planned data assumptions and simplifications Outcomes and prioritization #13 List and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes, with rationale 6-7 individual studies #14 Describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis 10 Data synthesis #15a Describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised 11-12 Data synthesis #15b If data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of consistency (such as I2, Kendall's ô) Data synthesis #15c Describe any proposed additional analyses (such as sensitivity or subgroup analyses, meta-regression) 12 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 Additional outcomes will be severity of symptoms, functioning, burden, and compliance/drop-out. We conducted a comprehensive search of CENTRAL, MEDLINE(R), PsycInfo, CINAHL (08/08/2019), and reference lists of review articles. Full-text assessment of eligibility, data extraction, and risk of bias assessment will be done by two independent reviewers. A network meta-analysis will be conducted for any of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The analyses will make use of a random effects model within a frequentist framework. Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk ratios for dichotomous outcomes. Interventions will be ranked according to their relative efficacy. We will address the assumption of transitivity, heterogeneity, and inconsistency using theoretical and statistical approaches. The possibility of publication bias and the strength of evidence will also be examined. Ethics and dissemination: There are no ethical concerns. Results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at practitioners' conferences. The study has been registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42020148728). ? Network meta-analysis (NMA) will provide new information on the efficacy of different types of family interventions for psychotic disorders. ? It will enable comparisons and increase the precision of effect estimates. ? It will possibly result in a ranking of intervention types that can inform guidelines for clinical practice. ? Diversity of studies may result in heterogeneity or inconsistency, which will be addressed with theoretical and statistical approaches. available treatment is antipsychotic drug therapy. However, because of unsatisfactory response, problems with adherence, and disabling side-effects [1, 2] , the focus has begun to switch more towards psychosocial interventions. Family interventions are one of two psychosocial therapies strongly recommended in recent clinical practice guidelines [3] [4] [5] . The relatives of people with psychotic disorders play an important role in the course of the disorder. High levels of expressed emotions (EE), i.e. criticism, hostility, and emotional overinvolvement expressed by the family [6] , were shown to be a reliable predictor of relapse in numerous studies [7] . Additionally, relatives are often the primary caregivers of patients with psychosis and are thus generally considered "important in the process of assessment and engagement in treatment and also in the successful delivery of effective interventions and therapies for people with psychotic disorders" [4; British NICE guidelines, p. 28]. As a result, attempts were made to positively influence the course of psychotic disorders by improving its management within the patients' families. However, caring for a person with a psychotic disorder is often a heavy burden and relatives face considerable emotional, social, and economical challenges [8] [9] [10] . These stressful conditions are likely not only to affect the well-being of the relatives, but also to limit their long-term ability to support the patient. Therefore, reducing the burden of care and enhancing the wellbeing of carers has become an additional focus of family interventions. Extensive research has been done on family interventions' efficacy. Previous meta-analyses have found family interventions to substantially and consistently reduce relapse and rehospitalization rates at follow-up assessments (RR ? 0.5-0.8) [4, [11] [12] [13] . Symptom severity and social functioning also show slight improvements, although the evidence base is less solid (SMD ? 0.3-0.4) [4, 13] . Regarding caregivers' outcomes, the most profound finding seems to be a significantly reduced amount of high EE families and a reduced burden of care [13, 14] . One well-known limiting factor of the evidence base and the delivering of efficacious family interventions is their great variability regarding content, aims, and format [3, 12, 15] . Pharoa et al. [13] list seven different strategies of family interventions and Lobban et al. [15] [17] ), from training of communication and problem-solving skills (e.g. the Behavioural Family Therapy [18] ) to mutual support groups [19] , and from a few sessions to years of support. Despite the variety in the content of interventions, we still know little about whether some approaches are more efficacious than others. Separate meta-analyses have been conducted on specific types of interventions, such as psychoeducation, psychoeducation plus skills training, and systemic therapy [20] [21] [22] [23] . All of them found evidence for the specific interventions' efficacy, albeit in regard to different outcomes and follow-up periods. One meta-analysis differentiated between cognitivebehavioral, purely behavioral, and "pragmatic" family interventions and found no difference in regard to relapse [24] . For recent-onset psychosis, a meta-analysis found mutual support to be more effective than psychoeducation in improving family functioning 1 to 2 years after the intervention [14] . However, this analysis was only based on two studies that had directly compared these approaches. In a systematic review of randomized controlled trials (RCT) on outcomes for relatives of people with psychotic disorders, none of the content components or types assigned to the studies (e.g. psychoeducation only, psychoeducation plus mutual support, psychoeducation plus skills training) reliably distinguished effective from ineffective interventions [15] . Similarly, we are still in the dark about the ideal format of a family intervention. Some metaanalyses have calculated effects for subgroups of studies with specific formats. These indicate that more extensive interventions are more successful in reducing relapse [4, 12] and demonstrate that the positive evidence for family interventions is mainly based on interventions that include the patient [4] . Meta-analyses on studies that have directly compared interventions with a focus on single families versus multiple family groups did not find them to differ in terms of relapse, but suggest that working with single families is better accepted than group settings involving multiple families [4, 13] . The existing meta-analytic approaches have several limitations when it comes to evaluating the comparative efficacy of different intervention types: 1. The differentiation of intervention types is unclear. In addition to unclear descriptions in primary studies [15] , many interventions comprise a variety of different components. The definitions used in existing meta-analyses and reviews are diverse and often imprecise. There are only few studies that directly compare different types of interventions and these have rarely been meta-analyzed. Most of the meta-analytic evidence is based on comparisons of a single intervention type to a non-intervention control condition. 4 . For most of the intervention types the number of studies is small. E.g., many subgroup meta-analyses for specific formats are based on less than five studies [4, 13] . This results in imprecise effect size estimates and limits the interpretation of significance. 5. The differential effects of some important characteristics of family interventions (e.g. media-based vs. face-to-face formats) have not yet been investigated meta-analytically. On this background it is still widely unclear whether there are significant differences in efficacy between different types of family interventions. This study aims to compare the types of family interventions in a systematic and consistent manner, using the method of network metaanalysis (NMA). NMA extends on classical meta-analysis because it allows to simultaneously compare multiple intervention types and to combine the evidence of direct comparisons with indirect comparisons to common control conditions [25, 26] . This enables us to evaluate the comparative efficacy of intervention types that have not yet been directly compared. Due to the inclusion of additional information from indirect comparisons, the efficacy can also be estimated more precisely [27] . Finally, all intervention types can be ranked according to their relative efficacy. This information could be of high value for patients, their families, as well as healthcare providers and may serve as a guideline for delivering the most efficacious interventions. Using NMA, this study aims to compare the efficacy of different types of family interventions for people with psychotic disorders and their relatives. Interventions will be differentiated by ? content (e.g. psychoeducation, mutual support, skills training) and ? format (e.g. number of sessions, inclusion of patient, form of delivery). Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) [28] , the PRISMA extension statement for reporting of systematic reviews incorporating NMA of healthcare interventions [29] , and the chapter of the Cochrane Handbook on undertaking NMA [25] . The NMA has been registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42020148728); the record will be updated with any changes made to the protocol. To include a sufficient number of studies for the specific direct and indirect comparisons and to increase the connectivity of the networks, some of the eligibility criteria are more lenient than in traditional meta-analysis [30] . a. People with a diagnosis of a psychotic disorder, defined as schizophrenia, schizo-affective disorder, schizophreniform disorder, brief psychotic disorder, or delusional disorder. In order to meet the diversity of clinical practice [31] , all kinds of definitions and diagnostic procedures as well as all kinds of comorbid disorders will be accepted. Populations with subthreshold psychotic symptoms (e.g. high-risk populations) will be excluded. There will be no restrictions regarding age as family interventions are also common in younger people/adolescents (e.g. first episode of psychosis). Samples also including people without psychotic but with other diagnoses are eligible if most of the patients are diagnosed with a psychotic disorder. "Most" is defined as a minimum of 75% to ensure that the included studies allow drawing conclusions about the population of interest and in accordance with a previous Cochrane meta-analysis on family interventions for schizophrenia [13] . If only broad categories of psychotic disorders in major classification systems, such as "Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders" in DSM-IV [32] or "Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders" in ICD-10 [33] , are used to describe the diagnoses, we assume that at least 75% are psychotic disorders as defined above. b. The relatives, spouses/partners, friends or non-professional carers of the people with psychotic disorders, as defined by the study. They have to be of an adult age, minor children of people with psychotic disorders will be excluded. Intervention: Family interventions, defined as any psychosocial intervention directed at the relatives, spouses/partners, friends or non-professional carers of people with a psychotic disorder, will be included. If the intervention also comprises treatment elements for patients only, a substantial part of the intervention as a whole (i.e. at least 50%, excluding treatment as usual or comparator elements) has to be directed at a relative, spouse/partner, friend or non-professional carer. The exact types and definitions of interventions to be compared in the analyses will depend on the distinct interventions and comparisons realized in the included studies and may be adjusted, amended, or lumped. The following categories were created in consideration of the classifications resulting from previous review articles [3, 12, 15, 34] and after pilot screening of about 25 primary study articles. These articles were identified as key publications in reviews and on the basis of the current state of research. A.L. read the full texts of the publications, the study designs were then discussed in the research team. 1. Counseling and management: general support in organizational, social, or emotional issues. If different types of family interventions are compared in a study, they have to differ in at least one of these categories because otherwise their comparison could not be included in the network. Comparator: Any kind of comparator will be included. The following classification of the comparator's content is also preliminary and may be adjusted through the process of study selection. So far it includes no treatment vs. treatment as usual (as defined by the study) vs. psychosocial intervention for patients only (e.g. psychoeducation, cognitive-behavioral therapy, social skills training). Study type: RCTs will be included, defined according to the Cochrane Handbook as trials in which "the author(s) state explicitly (usually by some variant of the term 'random' to describe the allocation procedure used) that the groups compared in the trial were established by random allocation" [35] . Quasi-RCTs, cluster-RCTs, and crossover trials will be excluded. The outcomes were selected and defined in consideration of previous reviews, pilot screening of study articles, and statistical properties. However, here too, the definitions may be refined during study selection and data extraction based on the specific measures used in the included studies. The most commonly reported measures of family interventions' efficacy will serve as main outcomes: For people with psychotic disorders: Global clinical state, including the occurrence of relapse, hospitalization, crisis care service use, or remission/recovery, as defined by the study. Coping and attitudes, including endpoint scores in rating scales or questionnaires concerning EE, communicative or problem solving skills, coping with stress and numerical outcome data for the calculation of standardized mean differences (SMD) for continuous outcomes and risk ratios (RR) for dichotomous outcomes. Change scores will be excluded because the combined analysis with endpoint scores is not recommended when using SMDs [36] . If a study reports multiple eligible outcome measures with sufficient information for effect size calculation, the measure for inclusion will be selected based on the following criteria, which were developed to maximize validity and homogeneity of study outcomes: (a) For multiple measures within the same outcome category, measures will be preferred according to the order they are listed above (e.g. for global clinical state, our first preference will be measures of relapse, if these are not reported we will include measures of hospitalization, then measures of crisis care service use and then measures indicating the extent of remission or recovery). (b) For multiple time-points, outcomes at one year (after the beginning of intervention/baseline assessment) or those closest to this time-point will be preferred. (c) For multiple methods of assessment (e.g. different scales), the most commonly reported will be determined among the included studies and these will be preferred for inclusion. In cases in which more than one outcome remains, the one with the best psychometric properties will be preferred. (d) For multiple samples, the one with the most comprehensive and adequate outcomes orif outcomes are equivalent -the largest N will be preferred. The criteria may be adjusted if this is required based on the included studies. If no single outcome measure can be determined based on these criteria, a composite effect will be calculated (e.g. for separate scales of positive and negative psychotic symptoms). The procedure of calculating a composite effect will follow the proposals made by Borenstein et al. [37] . Reports will have to include an English abstract to evaluate eligibility in a first step. Conference/congress abstracts and trial registrations without results will be excluded as these reports do not present sufficient data for the assessment of eligibility, especially regarding outcomes. However, we will try to identify more comprehensive publications for relevant trials (see Searches). Foreign language articles will be translated. If there are multiple reports referring to the same study of which at least one presents sufficient information for our analyses in English, the reports in other languages will not be considered due to limited resources. The 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   NETWORK META-ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   9 Additionally, the reference lists of the most relevant, recent, and comprehensive review articles were screened to identify articles missed by the computerized search. Reviews were identified by the above searches and by searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. We also try to identify full reports of relevant trial registrations, study protocols, and congress abstracts as well as cross-references in primary articles. Bibliographic data of all articles retrieved by the search will be imported into the reference management software ZOTERO. They will be de-duplicated using the tool of the Systematic Review Accelerator by the Centre for Research in Evidence-Based Practice (http://crebp-sra.com/#/), which was found to have good sensitivity and specificity [38] , and additional manual screening. Titles and abstracts of the remaining articles and the additional articles identified from references will be screened by the first author to identify studies that potentially meet the inclusion criteria. Of those, the full texts will be consulted. We will try to identify overlapping samples and multiple reports of the same study by comparing e.g. author names, study sites and years, sample sizes, demographical and clinical data, treatment descriptions, and results. Eligibility of each study will be assessed independently by two review team members and documented in an adapted version of the Cochrane data collection form (intervention reviews -RCTs only). Discrepancies will be identified and a consensus will be formed by discussion, including a third review team member where necessary. In the case of major unclarities we will attempt to obtain additional information from previous reviews that included the study or from the study authors if there is an accurate email address available. A data collection form and tool will be created and pilot-tested in consideration of the recommendations in chapter 5.3 and 5.4 of the Cochrane Handbook [39] . Two review team members will extract data independently; discrepancies will be resolved through discussion, including the third review team member where necessary. In the case of missing data or unclear study information, we will again consult previous review articles or -if an accurate email address is available -ask the study authors to provide the relevant information on intervention characteristics and outcome data. Extracted information will include: (1) Characteristics of the study: year, country. (2) Characteristics of the report(s): authors, year, type of publication. (3) Characteristics of the sample: number randomized per group, sex, age 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  Risk of bias in individual studies will be assessed using the Version 2 of the Cochrane risk-ofbias tool for randomized trials (RoB 2) [40] . This recently developed tool uses signaling questions and an algorithm to help making judgments of "low risk", "some concerns", or "high risk" related to five domains: (1) bias arising from the randomization process; (2) bias due to deviations from intended interventions; (3) bias due to missing outcome data; (4) bias in measurement of the outcome; (5) bias in selection of the reported result. Additionally, an overall risk of bias will be determined by the tool's algorithm. The assessment will be done for each trial's outcome and with respect to the assignment to the intervention (intention-to-treat effect). Two trained review team members will independently answer the signaling questions using the available Excel form. Disagreements will be identified with the discrepancy check function and will be resolved by discussion, involving the third review team member where necessary. As high risks of bias may result in an overestimation of family interventions' efficacy, studies with overall high risk will be excluded from the sensitivity analyses. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  A NMA will be conducted for each of the planned outcomes and intervention characteristics for which sufficient and appropriate data is available. The R package netmeta will be used. Analyses will apply a random effects model within a frequentist framework [41] . We will assume a constant heterogeneity across the comparisons within a network. A network plot will be used to display the intervention types (as nodes) and the quantity of studies for all possible treatment comparisons (as connecting lines). Estimates for all pairwise treatment effects will be obtained using standardized mean differences for continuous outcomes and risk ratios for dichotomous outcomes, both with their 95% confidence intervals. The effects will be displayed in a league characteristics. E.g., the type of family intervention might differ depending on the severity of the relatives' dysfunction/distress, which was found to be associated with the efficacy of interventions [15] , or interventions with more sessions may report on outcomes with longer follow-up periods. To evaluate the likelihood of transitivity, the distribution of potential effect modifiers will be compared between trials of different intervention types and investigated for similarity [25, 44, 45] . Based on Cochrane recommendations [36] , clinical hypotheses, and empirical evidence [4, 15] , characteristics for investigation will include: 1. intervention characteristics: content of the intervention, number of sessions, inclusion of patient, form of delivery; 2. existence of co-treatment for patients only (above treatment as usual); 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  Transitivity will also be addressed by assessing the consistency of direct and indirect evidence [30] , with both local and global methods [25, 44] . Locally, the inconsistency of a specific treatment comparison will be evaluated by splitting the network estimate into the contribution of direct and indirect evidence and checking for agreement. Global heterogeneity of the network will be assessed using a generalized Q-and I 2 -statistic [41] . A decomposition into Q-statistics for heterogeneity within designs (i.e. studies with the same treatment comparisons) and between designs will help to identify sources of heterogeneity and to evaluate the inconsistency of the network as a whole. We will examine the possibility of publication bias by non-statistical considerations [  In sensitivity analyses, studies with an overall high risk of bias will be excluded. If there is evidence that the assumption of transitivity is threatened within a network (s. Diversity and transitivity), i.e. if there are significant differences between the distributions of potential effect modifiers, we will try to increase consistency and homogeneity by performing subgroup NMAs for the distinct manifestations of the potential effect modifiers. E.g., regarding the number of sessions, there may be separate analyses for studies with a focus on psychoeducation and studies with other foci.  Patients or the public will not be involved in the design or conduct of the study. However, the EmPeeRie (Empower Peers to Research) Now group at the UKE (Outpatient Clinic at the University of Hamburg) will consult on issues concerning reporting, interpretation, and dissemination of findings. The EmPeeRie Now group consists of members with lived experience of mental disorders, with multiple members having lived experience in psychosis. There are no ethical issues apparent. Results will be published in peer-reviewed journals and be presented at practitioners' congresses. Full data will be made available upon request. AL and TL designed this study in close cooperation. AL drafted the protocol and final manuscript, TL revised and approved it. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors do not have any competing interests. I, the Submitting Author has the right to grant and does grant on behalf of all authors of the Work (as defined in the below author licence), an exclusive licence and/or a non-exclusive licence for contributions from authors who are: i) UK Crown employees; ii) where BMJ has agreed a CC-BY licence shall apply, and/or iii) in accordance with the terms applicable for US Federal Government officers or employees acting as part of their official duties; on a worldwide, perpetual, irrevocable, royalty-free basis to BMJ Publishing Group Ltd ("BMJ") its licensees and where the relevant Journal is co-owned by BMJ to the co-owners of the Journal, to publish the Work in BMJ Open and any other BMJ products and to exploit all rights, as set out in our licence. The Submitting Author accepts and understands that any supply made under these terms is made by BMJ to the Submitting Author unless you are acting as an employee on behalf of your employer or a postgraduate student of an affiliated institution which is paying any applicable article 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   NETWORK META-ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   14 publishing charge ("APC") for Open Access articles. Where the Submitting Author wishes to make the Work available on an Open Access basis (and intends to pay the relevant APC), the terms of reuse of such Open Access shall be governed by a Creative Commons licence -details of these licences and which Creative Commons licence will apply to this Work are set out in our licence referred to above. 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   NETWORK META-ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   15  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y   NETWORK META-ANALYSIS ON FAMILY INTERVENTIONS FOR PSYCHOSIS   16  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60   F  o  r  p  e  e  r  r  e  v  i  e  w  o  n  l  y  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59 Describe the mechanism(s) that will be used to manage records and data throughout the review 9 Study recordsselection process #11b State the process that will be used for selecting studies (such as two independent reviewers) through each phase of the review (that is, screening, eligibility and inclusion in meta-analysis) 9 Study records -data collection process #11c Describe planned method of extracting data from reports (such as piloting forms, done independently, in duplicate), any processes for obtaining and confirming data from investigators 9 Data items #12 List and define all variables for which data will be sought (such as PICO items, funding sources), any pre-planned data assumptions and simplifications Outcomes and prioritization #13 List and define all outcomes for which data will be sought, including prioritization of main and additional outcomes, with rationale 6-8 individual studies #14 Describe anticipated methods for assessing risk of bias of individual studies, including whether this will be done at the outcome or study level, or both; state how this information will be used in data synthesis 10 Data synthesis #15a Describe criteria under which study data will be quantitatively synthesised [11] [12] Data synthesis #15b If data are appropriate for quantitative synthesis, describe planned summary measures, methods of handling data and methods of combining data from studies, including any planned exploration of 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36  37  38  39  40  41  42  43  44  45  46  47  48  49  50  51  52  53  54  55  56  57  58  59  60  