The role of vaccines in combatting antimicrobial resistance Supplementary information The role of vaccines in combating antimicrobial resistance
Francesca Micoli, Fabio Bagnoli, Rino Rappuoli, Davide Serruto
Supplementary text box 1
Bacteria can be intrinsically resistant to antibiotics but can also acquire resistance through mutations in chromosomal genes and by transmission of genetic material through horizontal gene transfer between microorganisms in the same colonization niche. A bacterial species is intrinsically resistance when can resist the action of a specific antibiotic because the antibiotic's target is absent or different from a structural/chemical point of view; for example, the different structures and composition of Gram-positive and Gram-negative membranes is a common intrinsic mechanism of resistance 2 . In addition to intrinsic resistance, bacteria can develop or acquire resistance to antibiotics in three main ways reviewed in 2 (see the figure). 1) Prevention of antibiotic access to target: bacteria can exploit this mechanism by reducing the permeability of the outer membrane (via down regulation or expression of more selective porins) or by expressing efflux pumps. Efflux pumps can also be overexpressed (via mutations in transcriptional regulators or in response to colonization of host niches) conferring high levels of resistance and when characterized by a wide substrate specificity they are responsible of multidrug resistance (MDR) and known as MDR efflux pumps. 2) Modification of antibiotic target: to exploit their actions, antibiotics specifically bind to bacterial targets thus preventing their normal activities in the bacterial physiology. Bacteria can modify the targets hampering antibiotic-target interaction by two mechanisms: i) generation of a mutant variant of the target through point mutation(s) or recombination; ii) post-translational modifications by addition of chemical groups by specific enzymes. 3) Inactivation of antibiotic: bacteria can inactivate antibiotics by expressing enzymes that can either degrade antibiotic molecules or modify them by addition of chemical groups that will then inhibit binding to target. orthopaedic, cardiothoracic, neurological, and plastic surgery 10 . This pathogen is also a leading cause of hospital-acquired pneumonia and BSI. A recent report published by CDC showed that S. aureus in 2017 caused in the US about 120,000 BSI and 20,000 associated deaths (one over six patients with staphylococcal BSI died) 11 . S. aureus is the main pathogen of community-acquired skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI). The incidence of these infections is generally higher in the paediatric population, the elderly, in crowded communities and when the risk of skin breaching is higher (e.g., infantry trainees, athletes and in nursing home residents). Although low in severity compared to other forms of S. aureus infections, uncomplicated SSTI account for the most prevalent form of staphylococcal infections in both adult and paediatric populations. SSTI are also associated with the development of serious complications such as BSI. Recurrent SSTI are very common, with rates ranging between 9 to 70 % in the US 12 . Up to 70% of patients with SSTI experience recurrences over one year, even after successful initial treatment. Importantly, recurrent infections were found to be more common after infection by methicillin resistant strains (MRSA) than with methicillin sensitive ones (MSSA) 12 . Given the high frequency of the infection, the large size of the affected population, the high contagious potential and the high prevalence of MDR strains, SSTI probably represents an important source of AMR generation and spread. S. aureus is the main pathogen of community-acquired skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI) and a leading cause of hospital-acquired pneumonia and BSI. The incidence of these infections is generally higher in the paediatric population, the elderly, in crowded communities and when the risk of skin breaching is higher (e.g., infantry trainees, athletes and in nursing home residents). Although low in severity compared to other forms of S. aureus infections, uncomplicated SSTI account for the most prevalent form of staphylococcal infections in both adult and paediatric populations. SSTI are also associated with the development of serious complications such as BSI. Recurrent SSTI are very common, with rates ranging between 9 to 70 % in the US 12 . Up to 70% of patients with SSTI experience recurrences over one year, even after successful initial treatment. Importantly, recurrent infections were found to be more common after infection by methicillin resistant strains (MRSA) than with methicillin sensitive ones (MSSA) 12 . Given the high frequency of the infection, the large size of the affected population, the high contagious potential and the high prevalence of MDR strains, SSTI probably represents an important source of AMR generation and spread. Neisseria gonorrhoeae -N. gonorrhoeae is an obligate Gram-negative human pathogen that causes gonorrhoeae, a sexually transmitted infection (STI) represented by urethritis in men and cervicitis in women. Most men who develop symptoms (usually urethritis) seek medical attention and are no longer infectious after treatment. However, asymptomatic men constitute about two-thirds of all infected men and are the principal source of spread of infection. On the other hand, more than half of infected women do not complain of symptoms and untreated cervical infections may favour N. gonorrhoeae to ascend upward into the uterus and fallopian tubes and cause pelvic inflammatory disease which may result in tubal factor infertility and ectopic pregnancy. Sporadically, N. gonorrhoeae enters the bloodstream, disseminates, and causes skin and/or joint infection and more rarely endocarditis or meningitis. Infected mothers may transmit gonococcal infection to their new-borns during delivery that can result in eye infection or rarely disseminated infection 13 . N. gonorrhoeae is distributed throughout the world and has become a major global health concern with an estimated 78 million new cases worldwide each year with 2300 deaths and a significant disability caused by Ng-associated morbidity 14 . The incidence is particularly high in Africa and in Western pacific and the burden of disease is highest in LMICs. The risk of contracting gonorrhoeae is highest among men who have sex with men and HIV-positive individuals. A peculiarity of N. gonorrhoeae pathogenesis is constituted by the fact that repeated infections are common and natural immunity confers limited or no protection 15 . Antibiotics are currently the only treatment for gonorrhoeae infections; however, N. gonorrhoeae has an extensive history of developing resistance to new agents and no single, reliable monotherapy to treat N. gonorrhoeae infection is currently available, a condition that provided to N. gonorrhoeae the status of "super bug". N. gonorrhoeae has a remarkable capacity to alter through different molecular mechanisms its DNA to adapt and survive in hostile human niches. In this way, the bacterium has evolved, acquired or developed all known mechanisms of resistance to antibiotics used for treatment (Box 1). Resistance to several drug classes is widespread, including macrolides, tetracyclines, and fluoroquinolones 16 . In response to the current AMR threat, research on novel drugs has generated new antimicrobials already tested in clinical trials 17 ; however, gonorrhoeae remains a highly prevalent disease, and new antimicrobials may be only a short-term solution based on the ability of N. gonorrhoeae to develop resistance. Pseudomonas aeruginosa -P. aeruginosa is a ubiquitous Gram-negative bacterium characterized by a large genome that encodes several virulence factors and a large proportion of regulatory enzymes important for metabolism and transportation of organic compounds. These genomic features confer to P. aeruginosa a great metabolic adaptability to survive in different niches and to environmental changes 18 . P. aeruginosa has been recognized as an opportunistic pathogen and is responsible for millions of infections each year in the community and 10-15% of all healthcare-associated infections 19 . P. aeruginosa causes high morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis patients 20 and immunocompromised individuals; they are at risk of several clinical syndromes including pneumonia, post-burns skin infection, and post-surgical infections, such as surgical site infections and UTI 21 . In addition, P. aeruginosa accounts for over 5% of infectious exacerbations in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and has been associated with increased mortality of these patients 22 . P. aeruginosa exhibits most of the known resistance mechanisms to antibiotics (Box 1); they are both intrinsic chromosomally encoded and genetically imported plasmids and affect the major classes of antibiotics such as â-lactams, aminoglycosides, quinolones and polymyxins. Some P. aeruginosa strains are resistant to more than three classes of antibiotic and pan-drug resistant strains have been reported 23 . P. aeruginosa is also able to form biofilm in the lungs of infected patients impeding the access of antibiotics to bacterial cells. Considering the problem of hospital-acquired infections, the prominent role of AMR P. aeruginosa strains in this respect and an aging population that can be at risk of different community-acquired and hospital-acquired P. aeruginosa infections, a vaccine against P. aeruginosa is desirable. However, despite significant efforts of academic and commercial researches, no licensed vaccines are available, and no potential candidates are currently in clinical trials 24 . Klebsiella pneumoniae -K. pneumoniae is a Gram-negative bacterium found as a commensal in the normal flora of the human mouth and intestine that primarily causes hospital-acquired infections, but can also cause community-acquired infections in immunocompromised patients or individuals with chronic airways diseases such as COPD 25 . In the context of hospital-acquired infections, K. pneumoniae is considered one of the leading causes with common clinical presentations such as pneumonia, UTI, liver abscess, meningitis and sepsis 26 . In the last two decades, K. pneumoniae has become resistant to multiple antimicrobial agents, including carbapenem and extended spectrum beta-lactam antibiotics, becoming increasingly important as the leading cause of multi-drug resistant infections. Carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae associated with plasmid-encoded carbapenemases poses distinct clinical challenges due to its ability to acquire multiclass antibiotic resistance, producing invasive infections with high mortality 27 . Considering its lifestyle and ability to colonize multiple niches, K. pneumoniae can represent a repository and disseminator of genetic determinants to other bacteria species; it has been reported that K. pneumoniae species have acquired more than 400 AMR-associated genes 28 . Paratyphi A, Gram-negative bacteria of the Enterobacteriaceae family, are principal causes of enteric fever, a systemic febrile illness, human restricted. Without effective treatment, typhoid and paratyphoid fevers can lead to altered mental states, ileus, gastrointestinal bleeding, intestinal perforation, septic shock, and death. Transmission of disease is primarily by the faeco-oral route. After natural infection, specific antibodies are detected in serum and intestines. Both serovars are major cause of disease in South and South-East Asia, and the diseases are clinically indistinguishable 29 . S. Typhi has also become an increasing problem in sub-Saharan Africa 30 and large outbreaks have been reported in Oceania 31 . There are an estimated 11 million cases of typhoid fever, with ~ 116,800 associated deaths per year globally 32 . S. Paratyphi A causes over 3 million cases with approximately 19,000 deaths annually 32 . Paratyphoid infections are primarily treated with fluoroquinolones, third-generation cephalosporins and azithromycin. MDR strains to ampicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and chloramphenicol are widespread preventing these antibiotics to be used. Full resistance to fluoroquinolones, the drugs of choice for MDR cases, has also been reported 33, 34 (Table 1 ). The situation is particularly worrying in resource-limited settings where the few remaining effective antimicrobials are either unavailable or too expensive. Historically, the first-line treatments for typhoid have been ampicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and chloramphenicol 35 . First isolates with resistance to these three antibiotics were observed in the late 1970s to early 1980s and are widespread globally (Table 1) . Fluoroquinolones became drug of choice. However, reduced susceptibility to fluoroquinolones is widespread, and third-generation cephalosporins, and azithromycin are often used in alternative 36 . Most strains remain susceptible to azithromycin and ceftriaxone. However, an outbreak of extensively drug-resistant (XDR) typhoid with resistance to three first-line drugs, fluoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins has been recently reported in Pakistan 36 . Nontyphoidal Salmonella (NTS)-Invasive NTS are responsible for up to 39% of community-acquired bloodstream infections in sub-Saharan, with an average case fatality rate of 19%, mainly affecting infants, young children and patients with malaria, anemia, malnutrition, and HIV 37 . Fluoroquinolones are a typical choice for antibiotic treatment, with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, ampicillin or third-generation cephalosporins, such as ceftriaxone or cefotaxime, as alternatives. The effectiveness of antibiotic treatment is hampered by the difficulty in making a diagnosis in resourcelimited settings, the sudden onset of the disease, and the growing frequency of multidrug resistance (e.g. ST313) 33, 38, 39 (Table 1 ). In Malawi, around 90% of iNTS isolates are multi-drug resistant 40 . Shigella -Shigellosis is an acute human inflammatory disease of the large intestine, characterized by watery diarrhea, fever, abdominal cramps and pain, bloody and mucus stools, caused by Gramnegative Shigella enterobacteria 41 Since the introduction of sulfonamides in the late 1930s, clinicians have been forced to look for alternative antibiotics for the treatment of multidrug-resistant shigellosis. Tetracycline, chloramphenicol, ampicillin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and nalidixic acid have mainly been used. Presently, ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, and ceftriaxone are used, but decreased susceptibility or full resistance to these agents have been reported 44 . Many shigellosis outbreaks have been described by resistant strains of Shigella species 45 . In Asia and Africa, 65-85% of Shigella infections are resistant to nalidixic acid and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and 20-30% are resistant to fluoroquinolones. In Vietnam a strain with resistance to third-generation cephalosporins and fluoroquinolones has been identified, and strains in Bangladesh requiring treatment with the last-line antibiotic meropenem have been reported 46 . Furthermore, enteric diseases have a massive impact on the development of AMR for the large quantity of antimicrobials used in their treatment. This, together with increasing levels of multidrug-resistance that limit treatment effectiveness, makes Shigella a high priority for vaccine development (Table 1) . Group A Streptococcus (GAS) -Streptococcus pyogenes or Group A Streptococcus (GAS) is a Grampositive bacterium with the human as its unique reservoir. The nasopharyngeal mucosa and the skin are the two principal sites of asymptomatic colonization, responsible for the maintenance and transmission of GAS from person to person. GAS bacteria are able to penetrate tissue barriers leading to invasive infection at local and distant sites. GAS causes a wide range of diseases, from superficial infections such as pharyngitis, skin infections and cellulitis to severe invasive diseases including puerperal sepsis, necrotizing fasciitis and streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, with a high frequency of serious sequelae in LMICs, including acute rheumatic fever (ARF), rheumatic heart disease (RHD), and acute glomerulonephritis (PSGN) 47 . Pharyngitis is the most frequent symptomatic GAS infection and a major cause of antibiotic use 48 that can ultimately cause increase of resistance of other bacteria colonizing humans. Data from the 2017 Global Burden of Disease study showed that RHD alone was responsible for close to 300,000 deaths annually and over 33 million prevalent cases. Concerning rates of ARF in Australia and New Zealand 49 led the governments of these countries to support the Coalition to Advance New Vaccines for Group A Streptococcus (CANVAS), with the aim to aid the development of GAS vaccines for regions with high rates of GAS diseases. Mtb is an aerobic, non-motile bacillus that can be acquired in community or hospital settings. Mtb has an unusual, waxy coating on its cell surface, primarily due to the presence of mycolic acid, that makes the cells resistant to Gram staining. Mtb is predominant cause of pulmonary disease. In immunocompromised patients, multiple other systems can be affected including gastrointestinal, central nervous (CNS), genitourinary systems, and bones 50 . The primary mode of transmission is by airborne droplet. Symptoms of tuberculosis (TB) include lesion location, fever, night sweats and weight loss, and pulmonary infection is associated with dyspnoea and chest pain. Gastrointestinal infections cause abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea. CNS infection can cause headache, fever, neck stiffness, and neurological deficits. TB is now considered the world's deadliest infectious disease, leading to approximately 1.2 million deaths annually (IHME data 2017). It is particularly common in South East Asia and Africa. Immunocompromised persons are at particular risk, and TB is also responsible for 6% to 15% of maternal mortality globally. Also infants and young children are at specific risk of developing severe disease, often presenting as TB meningitis or military TB. Starting with streptomycin and p-aminosalicylic acid in 1945, many drugs were developed for TB treatment until 1960. The introduction of these drugs, with isoniazid, ethambutol, rifampicin and pyrazinamide being of most significance, led to the decline of TB incidence throughout the world and to the thought that TB was no longer a public health concern. However, in the 1980s, the disease suddenly came back in association with the rising epidemic of the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and the emergence of drug-resistant forms 51 . Treatment of TB requires several antibiotic drugs given simultaneously for at least six to nine months, depending on age, overall health, possible drug resistance, and the infection's location in the body. The emergence of Mtb resistant strains causes a major growing burden of hard-to-treat infections. An estimated 558,000 people developed drug-resistant TB in 2017, 82% of which were MDR cases; 230,000 deaths were due to drugresistant TB 51-53 . In patients known or suspected to have drug-resistant infections, a combination of antibiotics (e.g., fluoroquinolones, amikacin, kanamycin, capreomycin) is generally used for 20-30 months 54 . FDA has very recently approved another drug for drug-resistant TB, based on three antibiotics never combined before to treat TB: bedaquiline, pretomanid, and linezolid 55 . MDR TB requires prolonged treatment with expensive and often toxic drugs, and treatment failure is common 56 . Thus, vaccines can have a profound impact in reducing disease morbidity, and mortality as well as AMR 57 .  