Lentiviral vector production
empty
Lentiviral vector (rSIV.F/HN), pseudotyped with the lung-targeting F and HN proteins from Sendai Virus, was produced via five-plasmid transient transfection of HEK293T cells as described [1]. In brief, genome plasmids were constructed expressing a codon-optimised T1-3B bnAb (GenBank: KP231622.1; KP231643.1)[2] in the single-ORF expression configuration described previously [3], or a CpG-free Gaussia Luciferase (soGLux), inserted via unique NheI and PsPOMI sites, and driven by the hCEF promoter [4]. Vectors were purified using anion exchange chromatography and tangential flow filtration and formulated into either FreeStyle293 media or TSSM buffer (tromethamine 20 mM, NaCl 100 mM, sucrose 10 mg/mL, and mannitol 10 mg/mL). The functional titre of lentiviral vectors was determined based on the genomic integration of WPRE DNA sequence. Suspension HEK293F cells were transduced with dilutions of purified lentiviral vectors in FreeStyle293 media in the presence of 8 µg/mL of polybrene. Cells were incubated for 72 hours before genomic DNA was extracted. The integrated WPRE DNA was quantified against a standard curve of DNA mimics containing the WPRE sequence using the following primers: Forward: TGGCGTGGTGTGCACTGT; Reverse: CCCGGAAAGGAGCTGACA; Probe: FAM-TTGCTGACGCAACCCCCACTGG-TAMRA in triplicate using TaqMan FAST Universal Master Mix, normalised against total ng DNA. The PCR profile used was as following: 50?C for 2 min, 95?C for 10 min followed by 40 cycles of 95?C for 15 sec and 60?C for 1 min. Functional transducing units per mL of virus supernatant (TU/mL) was determined from the slope of a linear regression curve generated from the dilution series.
and purified using iodixanol gradient fractionation and diafiltration into D-PBS using Amicon Ultra-15 100K MWCO filters. The number of Genome Copies (GC/ml) was determined by qPCR. Purified rAAV was incubated with DNAse I (100°C for 10 min) BMJ Publishing Group Limited (BMJ) disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance Supplemental material placed on this supplemental material which has been supplied by the author(s) (1:1600) (dako P0214). TCID50 was calculated using the method of Reed and Muench [7] . All procedures involving laboratory mice were carried out at the Biomedical Services was administrated via nasal instillation in a single, continuous droplet with the mouse held vertically with mouth closed. For intramuscular dosing, mice were anaesthetised, the surface of the gastrocnemius muscle was cleaned with 70% ethanol and rAAV vector (in 40 µL) was delivered via injection. Following influenza challenge, mice were monitored daily and mice with weight loss ?20 percent were euthanized by rising concentration of CO2. At indicated time-points post dosing, sera and lavage fluid was collected as previously described [8] . Plates were read at OD450 after developing with 3,3?,5,5?-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate and reaction stopped with 0.18 M H2SO4 solution. The concentration of human IgG in the samples was determined using a standard curve. Expression levels in ELF were corrected for the dilution using lavage fluid collection urea assay as described previously [1] .  