Journal Pre-proof The COVID-19 pandemic as an opportunity to weaken environmental protection in Brazil The COVID-19 pandemic as an opportunity to weaken environmental protection in Brazil
Mariana Vale, Erika Berenguer, Marcio Argollo De Menezes, Ernesto Viveiros De Castro, Ludmila Pugliese De Siqueira, Rita De C?ssia, Q Portela
Please cite this article as: M.M. Vale, E. Berenguer, M.A. de Menezes, et al., The COVID-19 pandemic as an opportunity to weaken environmental protection in Brazil, Biological Conservation (2021), https://doi.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had both positive and negative impacts on the environment. An unexpected consequence of the pandemic, however, is the weakening of environmental regulation and enforcement (but see Corlett et al. 2020) . Across the tropics, deforestation increased between 63% and 136% during the COVID-19 outbreak, as compared to the same period in 2019, probably through relaxed legal enforcement during the outbreak (Brancalion et al. 2020) . The weakening of environmental enforcement is most likely due to the difficulties imposed by COVID-19, but the pandemic can also word as an excuse for ill-intentioned governments. In Brazil, a number of controversial actions by the Ministry of the Environment have occurred since the outbreak started in March 2020. While the weakening of environmental protection in Brazil has been going on since the onset of the current administration (Ferrante and Fearnside 2019; 2020a) , it seems to have intensified during the COVID-19 outbreak. The causal link between the pandemic and the dismantling of environmental protection in Brazil was confirmed by the release, by the Brazilian Supreme Court, of footage of a ministerial meeting that took place in April 2020, as part of an inquiry at the request of the Attorney General's Office on another matter (Spring 2020) . In the meeting, Brazilian actions included weakening environmental legislation and institutions, which legalized deforestation in key ecosystems, reduced environmental standards and law enforcement, and enfeebled Protected Areas' management. The likely consequences of those actions to biodiversity and environmental conservation are yet to be estimated. Brazil holds a substantial part of the world's biodiversity and tropical forests, playing an important role in regional and global climate stability and, therefore, the consequences of a weakening of its environmental protection are likely to cross the country's boundaries (Fernandes et al., 2017) . The dismantling of environmental protection in Brazil during the pandemic has the potential to intensify ongoing loss of biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions, and the likelihood of other zoonotic disease outbreaks, and inflict substantial harm to traditional and indigenous peoples (Andreazzi et al., 2020; The Lancet, 2020; Ferrante and Fearnside, 2020a; Gon?alves et al. 2020 ). Here we review the major actions by the Brazilian federal government to weaken environmental protection during the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as trends in deforestation and environmental fine during that period. We gathered information: i) on environmental deregulation and easing through a systematic search of all legislative acts published in the Brazilian Official Gazette, the official federal vehicle where all decrees and changes in legislation are published daily (https://www.in.gov.br/web/guest/inicio); ii) on monthly deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon from the Brazil's National deregulating or easing the current environmental legislation. One of the most significant deregulating acts was an order from the Minister of the Environment to reduce protection and provide amnesty for deforestation in the Atlantic Forest (Watanabe, 2020; Brasil, 2020a) , the ecosystem with the lowest original forest cover remaining in Brazil (Souza Jr. et al., 2020) . While the Brazilian Native Vegetation Protection Law (Law No. 12.651/2012) establishes parameters to protect native vegetation in the country, the protection of the Brazilian Atlantic Forest is regulated by a specific and more restrictive law (Law No. 11.428/2006) , which prevails over the Brazilian Native Vegetation Protection Law. The current government questioned this understanding, with a more flexible and weaker interpretation that would have dire consequences to the Atlantic Forest (Brasil, 2020a) . It would result in the amnesty of up to 20,000 km 2 of illegally deforested land, the removal of protection of 110,000 km 2 of currently protected vegetation within islands and mangroves, and inaction on 3,297 km 2 of vegetation in 'permanent preservation areas' that should had been restored (Rosa and Azevedo, 2020) . COVID-19 is also harmful for these areas that need restoration, as one of its more lasting impacts will be economic, restricting the availability of funds, particularly for active restoration that requires tree planting (Zahawi et al. 2020) . The synergism between the changes in the Atlantic Forest Law and the economic cutbacks caused by the COVID-19, therefore, could be disastrous for this already threatened ecosystem. After a campaign by the environmental movement and a lawsuit by the Public Prosecution Service, the order was canceled, but the Brazilian President No. 6446, http://portal.stf.jus.br/processos/detalhe.asp?incidente=5929755). Regarding legislative easing, several acts have postponed deadlines for both the public and the government to abide by different environmental regulations, including: a one-year extension of logging contracts (Brasil, 2020b) , the reduction of Brazil's annual emission targets until the end of 2021 (Brasil, 2020c) , and a two-year extension for fishing boats to adhere to a satellite-monitoring program (Brasil, 2020d) .The National Environment Council (Conama) Another way to weakening Ibama and ICMBio is to cut budgets and reduce the infrastructure available for law enforcement operations, especially those against deforestation in the Amazon, which require aircraft support and complex logistics (Brant and Machado, 2020) . The direct consequence is a reduction in the number of fines applied for environmental infractions (Fig. 2) . Usually, there is an increase in the number of fines with an increase in the number of environmental infractions, as seen for Amazon deforestation in 2019 (Fig. 2) . However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, despite high deforestation rates, the number of fines was reduced by 72% in with no reference to the PLANAVEG or its commission and no indication of any civil societal participation (Brasil, 2020e) . The Brazilian media, scientific community, and civil society, as well as illustrated by the many references to newspaper articles cited here. Since the start of the pandemic, the Brazilian scientific associations have also produced a myriad of repudiation letters, in addition to many publications in important scientific journals calling attention to the issue (e.g. Andreazzi et al., 2020; de Oliveira et al, 2020; Gon?alves et al., 2020; Ferrante et al., 2020b; Sills, 2020; The Lancet, 2020) . Our study is the first to quantify the influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on the weakening of environmental protection in Brazil. During the COVID-19 pandemic, pressure at the international arena for better environmental performance in Brazil has also been key. In May 2020, the Brazilian photojournalist Sebasti?o Salgado organized a petition with more than 300,000 signatures, including those of international artists, celebrities, scientists, and intellectuals, calling attention to the possibility of a "genocide" of indigenous peoples in the Amazon (Phillips, 2020). Pope Francis also expressed concern over the consequences of weak environmental protection and a COVID-19 outbreak among indigenous peoples in the Amazon (Blears, 2020) . Amazonian deforestation is not halted, given that European multinational J o u r n a l P r e -p r o o f companies were increasingly unable to meet their environmental targets when trading with Brazil (Frost, 2020) . In turn, public pressure has helped to revert a number of acts aimed at weakening environmental protection in Brazil, both before and after the start of the pandemic (e.g. Brasil, 2019b; Brasil, 2020f) . The accumulation of evidence showing that the Ministry of the Environment is committed to weakening environmental protection in Brazil prompted the Public Prosecution Service to request for the dismissal of the Ministry of the Environmental during the peak of the COVID-19 outbreak in July 2020 (Brasil, 2020g) . On change.org there were nine online petitions asking for his resignation and the hashtag #forasalles (#resignSalles) had 23.7k likes on Instagram by September 2020. The current Federal administration in Brazil took office in January Provides temporary fishing authorization for all fishermen that claim to practice industrial fishing. The authorization comes without any screening or evaluation of the fishermen and their practices. 