Journal Pre-proof A Case of Cytokine Hemofiltration and ECLS as Treatment of COVID-19 Respiratory Failure A Case of Cytokine Hemofiltration and ECLS as Treatment of COVID-19 Respiratory Failure 1 2
Omar Al-Qudsi, Bryan Whitson, Amar Bhatt, Sheila Chucta, Ravi Tripathi, Sheila Dnp, Ravi , Tripathi Md
empty
A hyperactive immune response has been implicated in COVID-19 respiratory failure. 24 Hemofiltration with a dialysis membrane designed to remove cytokines offers a potential 25 avenue for treatment. Discovery of the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (n-SARS-CoV-2) in late 74 2019 has brought with it a renewed interest in methods of inflammatory mitigation, particularly 75 due to reports of a cytokine release syndrome playing a pathogenic role [1] . One method of 76 decreasing inflammation is through hemofiltration in combination with a dialysis membrane 77 that has a large cutoff for protein permeability (high-cutoff/HCO), thereby capturing 78 inflammatory cytokines and attenuating their harmful side effects. The authors report a patient 79 with severe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) secondary to COVID-19 infection, 80 requiring Veno-Venous Extracorporeal Life Support (VV-ECLS) who was treated with cytokine 81 hemofiltration and showed clinical improvement. 82 Our patient is a 53 year-old female who presented with coronavirus infection and respiratory 84 failure culminating in hypoxemia refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation. She was 85 cannulated onto veno-venous extra-corporeal life support and treated with cytokine 86 hemofiltration using a high-cutoff filter. Following treatment, inflammatory markers improved 87 along with compliance and oxygenation. She was decannulated from ECLS shortly thereafter. 88 IRB approval was waived due to the single case report nature. Consent was obtained for use of 89 images and case data. In the 36 hours following cytokine filtration, compliance was noted to increase three-fold 155 (10.4cm/mlH2O) and her P:F ratio rose to 240 (table 1) . Her CXR also demonstrated a 156 remarkable progression, with near-complete resolution of her bilateral opacities and air 157 bronchograms (figure 1). She was subsequently weaned and decannulated from VV-ECLS over 158 the next four days and tracheostomy was performed to assist with liberation from mechanical 159 ventilation. Her tracheostomy has since been reversed and she has been discharged to rehab.  